[Amit Varma]: If a tree falls in a forest and no one is around to hear it, does it make a sound?
[Amit Varma]: That's an old philosophical thought experiment to which I will add this further question.
[Amit Varma]: If you feel a desire that you cannot name or understand, does that desire exist?
[Amit Varma]: This question is a poignant one with social and political implications.
[Amit Varma]: We instinctively think of some desires as legit and others as desires that we must hide
[Amit Varma]: away from the world and perhaps even from ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: We think of some desires as sanskari and others as somehow sinful, even if we don't act upon
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: But what is this sanskar?
[Amit Varma]: Look a little deeper and you will find that much of what we think of as traditional Indian
[Amit Varma]: morality is actually a by-product of colonialism, an imposition by the British or Victorian
[Amit Varma]: prudishness onto a society that has otherwise acknowledged and respected so many different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of desires.
[Amit Varma]: You might argue that, hey, the Manusmriti is such a repressive document, to which one
[Amit Varma]: can point out that the Kama Sutra written around the same period is not, and it was
[Amit Varma]: a British choice, not an Indian one, to privilege one over the other.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, the fact that we are today such an incredibly sexually repressed nation speaks
[Amit Varma]: to the victory of a strain of politics that has led to this.
[Amit Varma]: India was not always like this.
[Amit Varma]: India was not even mainly like this, but we suppressed the better angels of our nature
[Amit Varma]: and here we are.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not too late.
[Amit Varma]: We can still reclaim our true selves.
[Amit Varma]: And one way of doing this is by acknowledging and understanding the infinite variety of
[Unknown]: our desires.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode is about the history of desire and the history of sexuality in India.
[Amit Varma]: And my guest today is Madhavi Menon, author of the superb book, Infinite Variety, A History
[Amit Varma]: of Desire in India.
[Amit Varma]: This was an eye-opening read for me and for those of you who are not interested in sex
[Amit Varma]: because hey, sex is sinful, worry not, this book is full of stories about gods and you
[Amit Varma]: will find many moral lessons in their virtuous behavior.
[Amit Varma]: Before I give in to my desire to begin this conversation, though, I will practice momentary
[Amit Varma]: renunciation by pausing for a commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you're listening to the Scene and the Unseen, it means you like listening to audio and you're
[Amit Varma]: thirsty for knowledge, that being the case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors
[Amit Varma]: of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range of audiobooks from around
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: Their international collection is stellar, but so is a local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I
[Amit Varma]: talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Download that app and listen to my show.
[Amit Varma]: And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend
[Amit Varma]: an audiobook that I liked on that platform every week.
[Amit Varma]: My recommendation for this week is Wolf Hall by Hilary Mantel, a masterful historical novel
[Amit Varma]: that has won the Booker Prize.
[Amit Varma]: You'd never imagine that a book set in England between the years 1500 to 1535 could be so
[Amit Varma]: rich and engrossing.
[Amit Varma]: Listen to it as soon as you can on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Download their app or visit Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Remember to Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Madhavi, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: Thank you for your wonderful introduction, which frankly says everything I want to say
[Guest]: much better than I could ever say it.
[Guest]: So I don't know whether to say thank you or we're done.
[Amit Varma]: We can go have coffee now.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So before we...
[Amit Varma]: No, no, there is so much in your great book.
[Amit Varma]: And if I had a choice, I would keep you in the studio for all day to talk about it.
[Unknown]: Let's first talk about yourself.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what did you study?
[Amit Varma]: What were your sort of formative influences?
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've specialized in queer theory for a long time before you came to this.
[Amit Varma]: What's your journey been like?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I find those kinds of questions hard to answer because my life seems quite unremarkable actually.
[Guest]: But maybe that's what makes it fun.
[Guest]: I've always been interested, I guess, in underdogs.
[Guest]: I've always been interested in people who are not privileged, who are not in the center,
[Guest]: people who are marginalized, which at a very young age included women.
[Guest]: And so from a very young age, I was actually very keen on taking up arms against boys and
[Guest]: against men.
[Guest]: And I remember one of my earliest memories is when I was 10 years old, I was the editor
[Guest]: of my colony newsletter or newspaper.
[Guest]: And my first editorial had the wonderful title of boys, colon, something needs to be done.
[Amit Varma]: This would have been 1981.
[Guest]: I don't want to give your age away, but early 80s, right?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So, given that evidence, obviously, from an early age onwards, I was very invested both
[Guest]: in speaking up for people who I thought did not have a voice and be and actually trying
[Guest]: to do something about it.
[Guest]: And so I can't remember when exactly I turned to queer theory or to an interest in sexuality,
[Guest]: but I've always been interested in thinking about things that we ignore or take for granted
[Guest]: or vilify or actively sort of resist and push into a corner.
[Guest]: And I've always been free or felt free to do that.
[Guest]: My parents have always been supportive, maybe a bit puzzled by me at times, but always supportive.
[Guest]: My mother was a professor of English until she retired, so she was very interested in
[Guest]: sort of intellectual flights of fancy.
[Guest]: And my father, from whom I get my politics, was just always very politically active.
[Guest]: You know, their families come from Kerala, even though they grew up in Madras, and from
[Guest]: a Kerala in which the Land Distribution Act was happening when they were younger.
[Guest]: And my father, who comes from a very huge landowning family, a lot of their land got
[Guest]: taken away.
[Guest]: And all his life, he said that was absolutely the right thing to do.
[Guest]: And so I imbibed a lot of my politics from him, a lot of my intellect from my mother.
[Guest]: And there was never a question of my having to fight against them or fight against my
[Guest]: family, which I realized is a huge absence of pressure.
[Guest]: You know, a lot of people have to fight against their families first before they can do anything.
[Guest]: But for me, it was just always easy for me to focus on what I wanted to, because that
[Guest]: was never a problem, that I never had to fight at home, the battles that I could fight outside.
[Guest]: And for that, I think I'm very, very lucky.
[Amit Varma]: And who was sort of your formative influences?
[Amit Varma]: Like one question I often ask my guests, and one doesn't always have a pat answer to this
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, what are the books or what is the book that changed the way you think about
[Amit Varma]: the world?
[Amit Varma]: And is this, you know, some thinkers or some books that you can identify as just opening
[Amit Varma]: your eyes to a new way of looking at the world or clarifying things a little bit more?
[Guest]: Yeah, I am so bad at answering those kinds of questions, because I just sort of don't
[Guest]: keep lists.
[Guest]: But if I look back over my own lived reality, clearly, someone who influenced me a lot,
[Guest]: so much that I wanted to work on him, ever since I could remember, was Shakespeare.
[Guest]: I mean, my dissertation work was on Shakespeare, my first three books are on Shakespeare, and
[Guest]: I'm very deeply invested in him.
[Guest]: And I hate to admit it, but I'm that kind of nerd that when I'm feeling down, and need
[Guest]: something to pick me up, I actually turn to Shakespeare to read him, because that immediately
[Guest]: picks me up.
[Guest]: And so I've always known from, I'd say my middle teens, that I wanted to work on Shakespeare.
[Guest]: And when I went to graduate school in the US, I remember having a conversation with
[Guest]: my advisor, because I thought, you know, I wanted to work on Shakespeare.
[Guest]: And he said, that's great, do it.
[Guest]: But people have been writing on him for over 400 years.
[Guest]: So try and see if there's something different that you can do.
[Guest]: And that, I would say, is the first time I actually started thinking about what it was
[Guest]: in Shakespeare that uplifted me, that actually drew me to it.
[Guest]: Because before that, it was just, oh, my God, I love this, right?
[Guest]: And this is something that we work against with our students.
[Guest]: It's like, it's great that you love it, and now think about what it is that's inspiring
[Guest]: that love.
[Guest]: And so for me, when my advisor said, now think about what it is that you want to do with
[Guest]: Shakespeare, and maybe you want to look at him slightly differently, it became very,
[Guest]: very clear to me then, and it's something that I'm still sort of amazed by, how you
[Guest]: can say in wonderful language, in fabulous poetry and prose, things that are really hard
[Guest]: hitting, things that are really subversive.
[Guest]: And it's almost like packaging a radical politics in a gorgeous form.
[Guest]: So whether it's his poetry or his plays, and you know, I'm happy to talk about both, there's
[Guest]: a way in which Shakespeare is just sort of hits you when you least expect it.
[Guest]: And that's a skill I don't have, because I'm sort of very blunt edged, and it's like I
[Guest]: will hit you openly.
[Guest]: But Shakespeare is a real artist that way.
[Guest]: And one of the things I love most about his work, it's something like the poet Keats later
[Guest]: diagnosed about Shakespeare, and he said, Shakespeare has a negative capability, which
[Guest]: is to say he himself will not be anything, but he'll take on board any persona, any idea,
[Guest]: and become that.
[Guest]: And for me, that's always been important, especially in a day and age now where the
[Guest]: idea of the self is so important, it's like this is who I am, or this is what I am.
[Guest]: And I think we are so obsessed with the self that we forget to take on board otherness.
[Guest]: And so for me, that taking on board otherness is what Shakespeare exemplifies par excellence,
[Guest]: he is able to take on board multiplicity.
[Guest]: And that for me, just comes through in his works in ways that I find absolutely mind
[Amit Varma]: boggling.
[Amit Varma]: And that's fundamentally what art does, right?
[Amit Varma]: It takes on otherness, and it takes on those multiplicities.
[Amit Varma]: If Shakespeare was alive today, in this age of Instagram and TikTok and YouTube, web series
[Guest]: and all that, what do you think he'd be doing?
[Guest]: You know, the thing about Shakespeare that we forget, I mean, maybe you don't forget,
[Guest]: most of us forget, is that he was a popular writer, right?
[Guest]: He was writing for entertainment, he was writing to make money, like there is no question about
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: He was very clear that he needed to make money, he was not writing, he didn't think of his
[Guest]: writing as high art in any sense.
[Guest]: So whatever is most popular now, and you will know that better than me, that's what he would
[Guest]: be doing, right?
[Guest]: And one of my colleagues was, I was telling you about him, who's written this book called
[Guest]: Masala Shakespeare, his argument is that he would be writing for cinema, and not for Hollywood,
[Guest]: but for Bollywood, that Shakespeare would be writing popular scripts, with song and
[Guest]: dance, because his plays also full of that, all kinds of masala elements thrown into it,
[Amit Varma]: because that's what his plays do.
[Amit Varma]: He practically invented masala, like so much of Bollywood tropes come from Shakespeare.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And therefore, it's no surprise that Shakespeare provides the script for a lot of Bollywood
[Guest]: films as well, you know, various kinds of adaptations.
[Guest]: My favorite being, of course, Bhansali's Goliyon ki Raas Leela, Ram Leela, which I think is
[Guest]: just magnificent.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which I haven't seen.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you, and in fact, you know, you're talking about Shakespeare's popularity, I
[Amit Varma]: was telling you before this recording that I teach this course for Takshashila on how
[Amit Varma]: to write an op-ed in like, four webinars, and the second one of them is called the music
[Amit Varma]: of language.
[Amit Varma]: And it talks about Shakespeare a lot.
[Amit Varma]: It talks about why Shakespeare would have been a great op-ed writer, because part of
[Amit Varma]: the art of writing an op-ed always has to be to write accessibly.
[Amit Varma]: And for me, iambic pentameter is just the optimal accessible form.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because it's rhythmic and easy to say, right.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, that's the optimal length of a sentence, you know, which you can sort
[Guest]: of read comfortably or say comfortably.
[Guest]: And the meter, the iambic pentameter, of course, is, as people say, often like the heartbeat.
[Guest]: So it's just, it comes naturally to the body and viscerally to the body, which is great.
[Guest]: I'm glad your students get some Shakespeare in how to write an op-ed.
[Guest]: I mean, this is something we always forget, not always, often forget about Shakespeare,
[Guest]: because we're so obsessed with the plot of his plays, is that it's his language that's
[Guest]: doing all the work.
[Guest]: I mean, my favorite example is, say, Romeo and Juliet, in the first 14 lines of that
[Guest]: play, he tells you the plot.
[Guest]: These two people are going to fall in love and they're going to die.
[Guest]: Then we still have five acts after that, you know.
[Guest]: So the only reason to read that is not to find out, okay, kya hua?
[Guest]: What happened?
[Guest]: There's no suspense.
[Guest]: It's to find out how does this work out?
[Guest]: In what language?
[Guest]: In what form?
[Guest]: In what way?
[Guest]: So he's very clear, and none of his plots, with perhaps the exception of The Tempest or
[Guest]: a play like Pericles, actually not even Pericles, none of his plots is original.
[Guest]: So our obsession right now, for instance, with the idea of originality, Shakespeare
[Guest]: would not have understood what that meant.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, there's a very cool book called The Seven Basic Plots by Christopher Booker, I
[Amit Varma]: think.
[Amit Varma]: And as a teacher of English, you must have access to so many such books.
[Amit Varma]: But essentially, there are just a handful of plots which are recycled over and over
[Unknown]: again.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And what is important is perhaps a journey and not so much the destination.
[Amit Varma]: And your destination through all of this was this book, which we are talking about today.
[Amit Varma]: But what was your journey to it?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how did you arrive at this subject of writing about the history of desire?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, I'm struck by what you said about when you teach your students about how
[Guest]: to write an op-ed, you sort of insist to them on accessibility.
[Guest]: And that's something I pride myself on as well.
[Guest]: And it's something that comes quite naturally to me.
[Guest]: Because I think writing should be accessible, not in the sense of dumbed down, because I
[Guest]: think writing needs to deal with extremely rigorous ideas.
[Guest]: And I'm a great believer in rigor.
[Guest]: But that it needs to draw people in, insufficiently so that they want to deal with that difficulty,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: If you put them off at the very outset, then they're not going to come in to deal with
[Guest]: that difficulty.
[Guest]: So for me, I've always, even when I was writing my academic books, very invested in writing
[Guest]: accessibly.
[Guest]: And but as you know, when you're writing academic books, there is a certain degree of formal
[Guest]: constraint, right?
[Guest]: So you have to cite various texts, you have to have a bibliography that's very long.
[Guest]: And I was never fond of that, because I always thought that interrupted the flow of the writing.
[Guest]: And so I guess over the last 20 years, as I've been writing my books, I've been sort
[Guest]: of filing away certain lessons about how I would ideally like a popular book to be.
[Guest]: And all this was while I was still in the US, I was studying there, working there.
[Guest]: And then after I came back, one of the things I loved about being back, and one of the reasons
[Guest]: I wanted to move back, is that the intellectual culture in India is just much more broad based
[Guest]: than it is in the US.
[Guest]: As with so many things in the US, if you are an academic, you're an academic, you don't
[Guest]: really interact with anybody else, you're speaking to one another, five people will
[Guest]: read your book, and your book will come out two years after you've actually written it
[Guest]: when you've even forgotten what it is.
[Guest]: And so that kind of lag, time lag in terms of publication, social lag in terms of interaction,
[Guest]: is deeply ingrained in the US.
[Guest]: One of the many things I love about being here is that academics are reading the same
[Guest]: thing that lawyers are reading, that podcasters are reading, that activists are reading.
[Guest]: And so the conversation is much more multiform, right, that you can speak to many more demographics,
[Guest]: which I find enriching and enlivening, I really find it exciting.
[Guest]: So that was one thing.
[Guest]: And the second thing was that the conversations that people have can actually be about really
[Guest]: difficult subjects, but they can be had conversationally.
[Guest]: And so I was very invested in that as well.
[Guest]: And so I came back, I started writing a lot of op-eds, a lot of articles, which I loved
[Guest]: doing, because I was reaching a huge audience right away.
[Guest]: I was writing it the previous day, next day, it would emerge, right, which was unheard
[Amit Varma]: of with academics.
[Amit Varma]: How does an academy cope with the shock of reading a book?
[Guest]: That was really shocking.
[Guest]: But more important than that, I was been doing this for a year or two.
[Guest]: And then I met Ravi Singh, who was my editor, who was then with Aleph Books.
[Guest]: And Ravi had read one of my articles, I don't remember which one, I think it was something
[Guest]: about 377 or something about the national flag or one of those uncontroversial topics
[Guest]: about which I write.
[Guest]: And he approached me and he said, I want you to write something about desire in India.
[Guest]: And I said to Ravi, I have no training in India.
[Guest]: I am not a scholar of Indian literature, philosophy, history, religion, nothing.
[Guest]: I can't write about India.
[Guest]: And when you meet Ravi, which I hope you will at some point, you will realize he's an extremely
[Guest]: persistent man.
[Guest]: So he said, actually not dissimilar to what my advisor said to me, he said, you just need
[Guest]: to think about it differently.
[Guest]: Because I'm not asking you to write the definitive history of India.
[Guest]: I'm asking you to think about how these questions of desire that are affecting the way in which
[Guest]: you're thinking about life around you can actually be written in book form.
[Guest]: So I promised him I'd think about it at least.
[Guest]: And then I thought about it for a while.
[Guest]: And what became clear to me is that I could never write the book on desire in India.
[Guest]: But what I could do, and this is what I tried to do, is that I tried to think about the
[Guest]: important questions that animate queer theory.
[Guest]: Now, queer theory as a field barely even exists here, right?
[Guest]: But the important questions that animate queer theory, which, you know, broadly are questions
[Guest]: of identity, desire, sort of clothing, behavior, biology, I mean, all that stuff.
[Guest]: And think about what Indian writings, thoughts, beliefs have said about these questions.
[Guest]: So my framing narratives were very much derived from my training as a queer theorist.
[Guest]: Those are the questions I was going in with.
[Guest]: But the material I was looking at from the vantage point of these questions were Indian
[Guest]: materials, which I had never really looked at before.
[Guest]: And I remember starting out by saying, I am not going to touch the Kama Sutra because
[Guest]: it's been done to death, right?
[Guest]: Anyone who thinks about Indian sexuality does that.
[Guest]: But I said, I have to read it at least.
[Guest]: And when I read it, I was blown away.
[Guest]: And so, as you know, I refer to the Kama Sutra a lot in my book.
[Guest]: But my goal in the book was to be accessible, to be focused on specific questions and arguments
[Guest]: and ideas so people can actually engage, not be esoteric at all, which is what people think
[Guest]: when it's, oh, my God, this is Indian philosophy or Indian religion.
[Guest]: People get completely turned off by that.
[Guest]: But I'm used to that because that's what people do with Shakespeare as well, right?
[Guest]: It's like, oh, my God, Shakespeare is so esoteric, I can't deal with it.
[Guest]: So I'm actually very used to dealing with subjects that people think of as difficult,
[Guest]: but that I know actually affects our everyday life.
[Guest]: And so I guess I've had a lot of training thinking about these subjects and insisting
[Guest]: to people that, in fact, you're not, you don't have to be brilliant or have a PhD in order
[Guest]: to address these subjects.
[Guest]: These are subjects you're addressing already.
[Guest]: So let's just pause and think about them.
[Guest]: And so that was the way in which I arrived at this book, with a lot of encouragement
[Guest]: from Ravi and a lot of encouragement to sort of change the way I was thinking about India.
[Guest]: And so for me, as soon as I was able to get my questions right, I was able to delve into
[Guest]: the material.
[Guest]: Because otherwise, I think, if I had just jumped into the material without any clue,
[Guest]: I wouldn't have been able to anchor myself in any way.
[Guest]: So I had to anchor myself as a queer theorist, and then approach this material that was new.
[Guest]: And it was just exhilarating.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it was exhilarating as a reader for me to read it.
[Amit Varma]: I had a lot of fun reading it.
[Amit Varma]: So I could make out that you had a lot of fun writing it.
[Amit Varma]: And it sort of strikes me that there is the role of happenstance, that you weren't thinking
[Amit Varma]: of doing this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And then Ravi happened to ask you, and then you looked at it.
[Amit Varma]: And you went along a different path than you otherwise would have.
[Guest]: And who knows, maybe there's some other book at the end of the path not taken.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, one of the things that you say in your book, and you've said in your talks,
[Amit Varma]: and that you're very adamant about is that you will not define desire, right?
[Amit Varma]: So I won't ask you to define it, obviously, that would be mildly silly.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm just curious as to whether, you know, for example, it strikes me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: yesterday, I was craving a biryani.
[Amit Varma]: Now my desire for biryani is not desire.
[Amit Varma]: That's not what you mean in the book.
[Amit Varma]: From what I could make out your book includes your book accommodates carnal desire, romantic
[Amit Varma]: desire, which some would say is a rationalization, but at some biological level of carnal desire,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps even a little bit of spiritual desire thrown in, I don't know, I mean, so how does
[Amit Varma]: one then think about desire in this sense, without necessarily trying to nail it down,
[Guest]: which is a mistake all these patriarchs have made through history?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And that's a great question.
[Guest]: I think after the victory in Delhi, we should all be eating biryani to celebrate.
[Amit Varma]: We are recording this on February 13.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: I would say it was a victory for us, but not necessarily a defeat for the BJP.
[Guest]: And therefore, we should eat biryani just to make sure that we continue fighting.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Well said.
[Guest]: I would disagree that your desire for biryani is not the kind of desire I'm talking about.
[Guest]: Because I think one of the things I have done that we find convenient to do is precisely
[Guest]: to sort of separate desires from one another, devaluing some and overvaluing, I would say,
[Guest]: others.
[Guest]: And so your desire for biryani seems to fall into the lower class of desire, because it's
[Guest]: merely appetite, it's merely bodily, it has nothing to do with intellect, this, that and
[Guest]: the other.
[Guest]: I'm sort of paraphrasing what I think you might have felt when you said that.
[Guest]: And I would disagree with that because I really think one doesn't know the seat of desire.
[Guest]: One doesn't know what the confluences are that create certain desires.
[Guest]: And so I would say your mind was very much active in your bodily desire for biryani.
[Guest]: And so one of the things, of course, that I am interested in is not making that distinction
[Guest]: between mind and body, that there is something about the body that is very much controlled
[Guest]: by the mind, equally something about the mind that is very much controlled by the body.
[Guest]: And these things come together in all these desires that you mentioned.
[Guest]: And so for me, that desire for biryani, and as you know, I have a chapter on paan in the
[Guest]: book, and I could easily have had a chapter on food in general.
[Guest]: Because our desire for X is always a desire that comes from not necessarily a known source.
[Guest]: So we don't know necessarily, oh, why do I want biryani now?
[Guest]: And I think that absence of an origin or the complicated nature of an origin is always
[Guest]: what is interesting for me.
[Guest]: That's number one.
[Guest]: Number two becomes, we rank desires because we sort of feel some can be satisfied, which
[Guest]: are the lesser desires, and some can't be satisfied, which are the higher desires.
[Guest]: But of course, as you yourself already know, you'd be quite happy to eat biryani again
[Guest]: today.
[Guest]: But just because you ate it yesterday doesn't mean your desire is satisfied.
[Guest]: And this is precisely how we actually live sexuality.
[Guest]: And someone like Freud was one of the early people to theorize this, although, as I say
[Guest]: in my book, we've had these ideas around in India for centuries.
[Guest]: The idea that an act or a deed can exhaust your desire of any kind is completely fallacious.
[Guest]: So whether it is the act of genital sex, whether it is the act of eating biryani, whether it
[Guest]: is the act of writing a letter or an op-ed, that desire, as long as it's desire, always
[Guest]: needs to be refueled.
[Guest]: And that is precisely why desire is both so scary and necessary.
[Guest]: It's what keeps us going from day to day.
[Guest]: It's also what gets us charged up because it's the thing that can never be satisfied
[Guest]: in any lasting manner.
[Guest]: And so that's why desire, which is why there's so much legislation against it, desire can
[Guest]: be extremely threatening, both to the self and to the status quo at large, because it's
[Guest]: the thing that erupts without necessarily having an origin.
[Guest]: It's the thing that erupts, and even when it seems to subside, can erupt at some other
[Guest]: point in some other day.
[Guest]: So it's the thing over which we don't necessarily have control, which is why it's fascinating
[Guest]: to me to think about, for instance, traditions of celibacy.
[Guest]: And if I had written a chapter on food, you know, all this sort of fasting, all these
[Guest]: are ways of trying to establish control over something that actually we fear controls us.
[Guest]: And that's why desire can be so frightening.
[Guest]: That's why we want to actually compartmentalize it and say, these desires are okay, but these
[Guest]: are bad.
[Guest]: And my argument is that all desire is potentially threatening, no matter what kind.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's sort of, you know, you quote from the Kama Sutra Vatsyayana saying, passion
[Unknown]: knows no order, right, where even where he's outlying, you know, the different kinds of
[Amit Varma]: desires, he also says, look, there are exceptions, I can't contain them.
[Amit Varma]: And what seems to me, as you outlined so beautifully in your book, that one of the tragedies of
[Amit Varma]: human society, in a sense, is that we have forced these categories and taxonomies onto
[Amit Varma]: our desires, which then also have this overlay of normative thinking around them, that you
[Amit Varma]: know, heterosexuality is good, man and woman having children is good, but something else
[Amit Varma]: is not good.
[Amit Varma]: Three lovers together is not good, for example, which you have a chapter on called fractions.
[Amit Varma]: And so, tell me a little bit about this normative urge, like, is it an inevitable urge, or is
[Amit Varma]: it just happenstance that that urge run out where at one time in our culture, we had this
[Amit Varma]: multiplicity of desires that did not need to be given a name and about which value judgments
[Amit Varma]: were not necessarily made.
[Amit Varma]: And then we move to this very puritanical sort of setup where, you know, it's all different.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, Sudhir Kakkar has a biography of Vatsyayana, which is titled the ascetic
[Guest]: of desire.
[Guest]: It's a fictional biography.
[Guest]: And he's getting that phrase, which seems to be completely sort of contradictory.
[Guest]: He's getting that phrase from Vatsyayana himself, because Vatsyayana writes at the end of the
[Guest]: Kama Sutra, in which he sort of outlined all these sexual positions, among other things,
[Guest]: but all these ways of having sex.
[Guest]: He says at the end, Vatsyayana was completely celibate for the duration of writing this
[Guest]: text, that I wrote it not for my pleasure, but for disseminating knowledge.
[Guest]: And that is a very, that is a sort of nod to a very clear prescription that students
[Guest]: should not have sex, right, so that that stage of one's life, when one is a student, one
[Guest]: should not have sex.
[Guest]: I keep joking about this with my students saying, look how how fallen you are compared
[Guest]: to that.
[Guest]: Because the idea was that you need to and it's a complicated idea, because it's an idea
[Guest]: that is completely opposite, say Greek ideas about education in the in the same time.
[Guest]: So Vatsyayana says, I was celibate, but my celibacy, and this goes back to what I was
[Guest]: talking about Shakespeare's negative capability, my celibacy should not take away from the
[Guest]: fact that I can know and enjoy sexual positions, right, and that kind of ability to speak from
[Guest]: more than one position is what I fear we are losing now.
[Guest]: And so it's not necessarily that we were more plural and are not now, I think we are every
[Guest]: bit as plural now as we were then.
[Guest]: But we are certainly trying to cage that plurality, because it seems to be dangerous.
[Guest]: It seems to be scary to people.
[Guest]: And so Vatsyayana can say, I am writing of things that I am not practicing right now.
[Guest]: Whereas nowadays, the most sort of popular, say tag of a movie is based on a true story,
[Guest]: or based on real life.
[Guest]: And we are so invested in people speaking their truth, that we refuse to allow for the
[Guest]: fact that people have multiple truths.
[Guest]: And people have multiple falsities as well.
[Guest]: And no truth is completely the truth in the sense that we understand exactly.
[Guest]: And so that I feel is what we're losing.
[Guest]: And that's what say someone like Vatsyayana is able to model for us, that you don't have
[Guest]: to actually have one truth alone that defines you for the rest of your life, which I fear
[Guest]: is the problem with sexual identities.
[Guest]: And now this is a very, and I'm well aware that this is a sort of controversial thing
[Guest]: I'm saying, but I've said it many times before, that I understand the desire to be able to
[Guest]: say I am X, but that the people most fully served by my assertion that I am X, are people
[Guest]: in power over me, not me myself.
[Guest]: So in this sense, I think identity is a bit of a trap, because it's only people who want
[Guest]: to curtail my identity and shape it themselves, who want to know who I am.
[Guest]: So this question of I am X seems to me a wasted statement because I am X, Y, Z and A, B, C
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: But being forced to say I am X doesn't serve me.
[Guest]: It only serves those forms with those multiple boxes of which I can take only one.
[Guest]: And so what is sad for me about identity politics is to see people embracing it as their truth,
[Guest]: when it's nothing but the idea of truth as singularity being imposed on them.
[Guest]: And so my quarrel with identity politics is that people like us, and I mean every single
[Guest]: one of us because every single one of us is on the margins at various points in our lives.
[Guest]: People like us ought to know better, rather than try and scramble to join the center.
[Guest]: We need to be able to embrace marginality much more fully, and not necessarily speak
[Guest]: the language of the oppressor, which in this case, I think is the language of truth with
[Amit Varma]: a capital T.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what you just said, and also, you know, a lot of what is in your book, reminded me
[Amit Varma]: of this great insight that I got from Tony Joseph's book last year, Early Indians and
[Amit Varma]: Tony Joseph was also on the scene in The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the interesting things he pointed out was, of course, all those different migrations
[Amit Varma]: took place from out of Africa, West Asia, then the Aryan migration.
[Amit Varma]: And then after the Aryans came and the Aryans were here and the remnants of the Harappans
[Amit Varma]: were here and the earlier and what happened was that for about 2000 years, it was a party.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody mingled with everybody else.
[Amit Varma]: It was full Saturday night, every day, right.
[Amit Varma]: And then what happened is, around a couple of 1000 years ago, endogamy sets in a particular
[Amit Varma]: and this is really the victory of a particular political strand, which is that Brahminical
[Amit Varma]: strand which, you know, sets up the caste system and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And there's endogamy and you're not allowed to sort of mingle with others.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Robert Reich expressed the consequences of this quite brilliantly, the geneticist,
[Amit Varma]: when he said that, you know, people think of India as a large population.
[Amit Varma]: It's not.
[Amit Varma]: The Han Chinese are a large population.
[Amit Varma]: India is a collection of many, many small populations, which is what endogamy has done
[Amit Varma]: to us.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me from this, that one of the driving forces behind maintaining this sort
[Amit Varma]: of power structure would be controlling the sexual and reproductive choices of women,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, the curtailment of desire and the creation and the propagation of these
[Guest]: narrow categories.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Does that make sense to you?
[Guest]: It makes perfect sense to me.
[Guest]: Thank you. Wendy Doniger has done a lot of work on this.
[Guest]: And as she, as many others have pointed out, the Rig Veda, for instance, begins with a
[Guest]: hymn to desire.
[Guest]: And it begins with a hymn that says the only thing we can know is desire.
[Guest]: And even that we can never fully understand.
[Guest]: I mean, it pretty much is the thesis of my book, which is that all we know is that we're
[Guest]: shaped by desire and that we can never know in what way it's going to shape us.
[Guest]: That's the way the Rig Veda begins.
[Guest]: It's not till about 800 BC and the Upanishads start getting written, which is sort of several
[Guest]: hundred years later, that this second strand that you're talking about starts getting injected
[Guest]: into these discourses.
[Guest]: And so the Vedic literature in and of itself is actually quite invested in desire and sexuality,
[Guest]: sometimes very disturbingly.
[Guest]: For instance, you'll remember the story of Brahma.
[Guest]: The reason why Brahma has four heads is because he's lusting after his daughter and wants
[Guest]: to see her whichever direction she goes in.
[Guest]: And that is, for us now, a shocking story on all kinds of fronts.
[Guest]: First of all, he's a god, he's meant to be the creator.
[Guest]: Second, this is what we call incest.
[Guest]: Third, it's also what we call harassment, because she keeps trying to run away from
[Guest]: him and he keeps growing heads so as to look at her from every direction.
[Amit Varma]: That's in the Vedas.
[Guest]: A fantastic God for the modern surveillance age.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: The CCTV camera God.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And so our literatures of all kinds, our scriptures of all kinds, are actually filled with the
[Guest]: most disturbing kinds of desires, at least disturbing from our vantage point today.
[Guest]: And so to suddenly then start that purification process must have come as a shock even then
[Guest]: if it continues to reverberate for us today as a shock, and it does.
[Guest]: So you can imagine, I don't know what kind of battles must have taken place, but some
[Guest]: scholars say that one of the battles was the advent of Buddhism and Jainism.
[Guest]: That they found a lot of people moving away from Vedic Hinduism, which was not of course
[Guest]: called Hinduism then, so just Vedic religions.
[Guest]: Moving away from Vedic religions to the asceticism of Buddhism.
[Guest]: And so Vedic religions then said, oh my God, we're losing popularity.
[Guest]: What are we going to do?
[Guest]: And so they decided to inject a strand of asceticism into their discourses in order
[Guest]: to woo these people back.
[Guest]: That's why you have this entire sort of four stages of life where they say, okay, you can
[Guest]: have sex in this one stage, the householder stage, but everything before and after a celibate,
[Guest]: including the student stage.
[Guest]: And then the varnaprastha stage, right, when you go into the forest.
[Guest]: So all these are huge developments.
[Guest]: We don't quite, we're not privy to the controversies at that time where they debated this.
[Guest]: But no doubt they existed to a large extent.
[Guest]: But you can see how this extremely political desire, which unfortunately continues to this
[Guest]: day, where you want to use your religion to draw people away from other ways of being
[Guest]: in the world, must have existed.
[Guest]: It must have because Vedic religions definitely change or start changing.
[Guest]: Which is why, of course, even in the Mahabharata, you have the story of the invention of marriage.
[Guest]: Marriage did not exist for the longest time, right?
[Guest]: And this person called Shweta Ketu is sort of described as the person who started marriage
[Guest]: and he starts marriage because, and he's the son of a famous, what we would call today
[Guest]: sexologist, son of a famous sexologist who teaches like Vatsyayana, sex and sexual positions
[Guest]: to everybody.
[Guest]: And Shweta Ketu's mother and father, father's a sexologist, mother, like most women then
[Guest]: would have sex with whoever she wanted.
[Guest]: And apparently he was so upset when he saw her one day walking off with another Brahmin
[Guest]: that he said, why on earth should we have this freedom?
[Guest]: And the father says, but son, this is the way we've always been.
[Guest]: Why are you getting so upset about this?
[Guest]: And he says, well, from henceforth, it's not going to be this way.
[Guest]: Women must marry, to go back to your question of controlling women, women must marry one
[Guest]: man and stay faithful.
[Guest]: And that's marriage.
[Guest]: And this is what it's going to be from now on.
[Guest]: And apparently the father's horrified at that, but that is the beginning of marriage as we
[Guest]: know it, which is rooted in the desire to curb women's desire.
[Amit Varma]: So this is what you just said is a mythical instance of a historical process, obviously,
[Guest]: but it captures the impulse that, you know, women should not be, our women should not
[Amit Varma]: be sort of running around.
[Amit Varma]: So we've had these different strains and we'll come back later to, you know, how wonderfully
[Amit Varma]: wild and awesome Indian civilization has otherwise always been.
[Amit Varma]: But the whole process is then further exacerbated by the British coming to India and partly
[Amit Varma]: the British coming to India because, you know, they are incredibly sexually repressed.
[Amit Varma]: And as you've pointed out, we had open borders, they walked in because they could and also
[Amit Varma]: because they wanted some action, I guess, for them, it was like Bangkok is today for
[Unknown]: many Indian men.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit more about what happened, what did colonization do to us?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, I like to joke that when I was writing my book, I really tried hard not to blame
[Guest]: the British for everything.
[Guest]: And I just failed.
[Guest]: But I want on the record that I made a good faith effort.
[Guest]: I really tried because I am not overly invested in pointing the finger at one villain and
[Guest]: saying, you know, that's the villain of the story because I don't think it ever works
[Guest]: that way.
[Guest]: I think life is more complicated than that.
[Guest]: But unfortunately, with every one of my chapters, actually, this idea of plurality, this idea
[Guest]: of complexity, this idea of multiplicity would inevitably screech to a halt around a certain
[Guest]: historical point.
[Guest]: Now, whether that's because the British introduced certain laws, which they did, for instance,
[Guest]: to outlaw hijras or any transsexual or transgender people, or 377, where they outlawed acts against
[Guest]: nature, or if it was just sort of in pronouncements that they made with, say, Macaulay's minute
[Guest]: on education, whatever it is, on all fronts, I found myself faced with this huge barrier.
[Guest]: And so, yes, I think the British were to a large extent responsible for creating a version
[Guest]: of India that we continue to inhabit largely.
[Guest]: But, and I've said this in my book as well, they didn't pull this out of thin air.
[Guest]: They didn't or couldn't have imposed their repression wholesale on us if they didn't
[Guest]: already find within us some strands that were receptive to that repression.
[Guest]: And so, as I've said before, and this is what I was stating earlier about the Upanishads
[Guest]: suddenly sort of taking a turn.
[Guest]: And as you mentioned, Manusmriti and the caste system, they found in a certain version of
[Guest]: caste Hinduism, very fertile ground for their repression.
[Guest]: And so what they were able to do, and this is, you know, completely a master stroke of
[Guest]: politics, what they were able to do is cater to our worst instincts, because that's what
[Guest]: served their best interests.
[Guest]: And so they said to us, you know, people are different from one another, you have to rigidly
[Guest]: maintain that difference, you cannot, in fact, interact with one another.
[Guest]: And that policy, which is now called by everybody, the policy of divide and rule, was exactly
[Guest]: what they did in relation to India.
[Guest]: Not only in relation to religion, as we know, and we're still sort of living the consequences
[Guest]: of that, but also in relation to desire.
[Guest]: So again, as I've said before, if you just look back to say, 10th, 11th century sculptures
[Guest]: and Khajuraho and Puri and Konarak and all these temples across India, if you look at
[Guest]: Sufi poetry, again, from the 8th century onwards, you will find the celebration of variety,
[Guest]: the celebration of mixture.
[Guest]: And what the British did was to try and succeed to a large extent in separating the strands
[Guest]: of that mixture, in sort of saying, oh, here you have a sculpture where there are two women,
[Guest]: one man and one goat, goats belong in animals, men belong there with one woman, and the other
[Guest]: woman is out here.
[Guest]: And so they actually, I mean, you can actually sort of physically envisage it as deconstructing
[Guest]: a recipe, right?
[Guest]: It's like, you know, when you eat something delicious and you say, oh, I know what all
[Guest]: went into it, and you list the ingredients.
[Guest]: That's what they tried to do, is separate things out rather than enjoying the gorgeously
[Guest]: delicious finished product.
[Guest]: And but they were able to do that, as I said, because we already had a language of puritanical
[Guest]: separation.
[Guest]: We already had a language in which the shadow of a lower caste polluted an upper caste.
[Guest]: And that language of pollution, which is very much behind still the language of swachhata
[Guest]: or cleanliness, that is a language that they used with deadly effect.
[Guest]: And they used it on all kinds of fronts.
[Guest]: They used it to make us feel ashamed of our desires, ashamed of our bodies, and sort of
[Guest]: instigated a wholesale repression, whose consequences, I think, are absolutely awful and horrific.
[Amit Varma]: No, and as you've pointed out in your book, you know, many of the sculptures and temple
[Amit Varma]: art of the 10th century were actually made illegal under the British, you won't be able
[Guest]: to do those things like the two women, a man and a goat, there is actually a sculpture
[Guest]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think it's the goat, it's a horse.
[Amit Varma]: See, you're embellishing, diminishing, not go to smaller than a horse is suddenly a more
[Amit Varma]: attractive proposition.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that what the British did is somewhat willful, but at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: there's an element of happenstance to it, in the sense that they come to this country,
[Amit Varma]: they don't understand it is madly, deeply complex, they don't have the mental bandwidth
[Amit Varma]: or perhaps capacity to engage with it completely.
[Amit Varma]: So they try to draw simple narratives around it.
[Amit Varma]: And their first guides, the interlocutors in the country are obviously the elites, the
[Amit Varma]: Brahmins.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, so they are fed this Brahminical version where Manusmriti is a guide to morality
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And they extrapolate that to be the truth of the nation.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very convenient because a lot of their Victorian morality aligns with that
[Guest]: sort of aligns with that.
[Amit Varma]: And yet what is interesting is that in our popular culture, we see these multiple representations
[Amit Varma]: of desire, not just in the stories about our gods, but also in popular cinema.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just quote from your book here, where you write, quote, desire is of the world,
[Amit Varma]: and it extends across what we now term, hetero and homosexuality, both of which coexist happily
[Amit Varma]: alongside polyamory, which is Krishna with many gopis and celibacy, saints with matted
[Unknown]: hair.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later, you say, quote, all around me in the Delhi of the 1970s and 80s were Hindi
[Amit Varma]: films that celebrated same sex attachments, Anand, older women desiring younger men, Doosra
[Amit Varma]: Aadmi, and cross couple desire, Angur.
[Amit Varma]: So stop quote, yeah, so you know, so and later again, you say, quote, millions of people
[Amit Varma]: know the stories of cross dressing gods, men hold hands freely, women frequently sleep
[Amit Varma]: in the same bed.
[Amit Varma]: This is a country that is deeply homophilic, even as it is often superficially homophobic.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, tell me a bit about this angle, because you know, your book very fascinatingly
[Amit Varma]: the first chapter, and we are very close to Mehrauli, so I was struck with the urge to
[Amit Varma]: actually go and see the shrine, you really should, I actually will, and this is the joint
[Guest]: tomb of Jamali and Kamali, tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: I just want to sort of go back to your thing about cinema, or Hindi cinema, you know, Nick,
[Guest]: two weeks from now, this much wanted film is going to be released, Shubh Mangal's Yada
[Guest]: Saavdhan, which is being touted as a gay love story with Ayushman Khurrana and whoever his
[Guest]: love interest is.
[Guest]: And people are so delighted, there's a long article in the Indian Express the other day
[Guest]: about how Indian cinemas finally come of age, and we're dealing with issues of homosexuality
[Guest]: and openly dealing with issues of desire between men.
[Guest]: And that article, like many other such things really irritated me, because it seemed just
[Guest]: to blindly be speaking a language of Americanized identity politics, completely oblivious to
[Guest]: what's quite literally in our backyards.
[Guest]: And so this idea of, oh, here is a gay film, and finally, Indian movies have come of age,
[Guest]: A, forgets the history of Hindi cinema, which is the queerest history of any cinema tradition
[Guest]: anywhere in the world.
[Guest]: And so to forget that is, first of all, not to know your Hindi cinema very well.
[Guest]: But the second thing it's forgetting is a much older, much longer tradition of celebrating
[Guest]: same sex desire in this part of the world.
[Guest]: And the example that you just used from my book, which I talk about, which is the example
[Guest]: of various Dargahs across the subcontinent, most close by to us, the Dargah of Jamali
[Guest]: and Kamali.
[Guest]: And this is one of those Dargahs, it's called the Gay Taj Mahal.
[Guest]: It's actually beautiful, although one can't get into the actual tomb because it's under
[Guest]: lock and key, but it's beautiful when you look at it from the outside as well.
[Guest]: And Jamali and Kamali's Dargah is extremely commonplace, which is to say, as an idea in
[Guest]: which two men are buried together side by side, it is extremely commonplace.
[Guest]: And as we continue to know that the idea of being together in this life and the next and
[Guest]: the next is a very, very strong indicator of desire, lasting love, love that sort of
[Guest]: does not know the barrier of death.
[Guest]: And so you have these multiple sites across the subcontinent in which a saint and his
[Guest]: male disciple are buried side by side.
[Guest]: This is to go back to what I said about the complicated relation to education as well
[Guest]: that we have, right, and desire and education.
[Guest]: The saint and his disciple are buried side by side, two men, without any problem, without
[Guest]: any comment.
[Guest]: Clearly the student is buried by people who have survived him.
[Guest]: So there's no sort of talk even after these two men are dead.
[Guest]: And so you have these spaces.
[Guest]: And of course, Nizamuddin and Khosrow are perhaps even more famous an example, also
[Guest]: in our backyard here, where Khosrow's poetry about Nizamuddin is just frankly, so erotic
[Guest]: that it beats most erotic poetry I've ever read.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I want to quote from a bit of it.
[Amit Varma]: And this, of course, is translation because he didn't write in English.
[Amit Varma]: This is quoted in your book, Amir Khosrow on Nizamuddin Auliya, quote, my blossoming
[Amit Varma]: youth is red with passion.
[Amit Varma]: How can I spend this time alone?
[Amit Varma]: Will someone persuade Nizamuddin Auliya?
[Amit Varma]: For the more I coax him, the more he acts coy, I'll break my bangles and throw them
[Amit Varma]: on the bed.
[Amit Varma]: I'll set fire to these bodies of mine.
[Amit Varma]: The empty bed frightens me.
[Amit Varma]: The fire of separation scorches me.
[Guest]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: Exactly right.
[Guest]: See what I mean.
[Guest]: You know, we are so timid today and this is a very blazing, literally explicit expression
[Guest]: of desire now.
[Amit Varma]: And these are the people who are buried side by side.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not just sexual desire, it's also romantic love.
[Amit Varma]: Like after Nizamuddin dies, you quote in your book about this couplet of his, where he talks
[Amit Varma]: about let the hair hang over my face because the universe is dark.
[Guest]: It's dark.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: That, you know, darkness has set upon the world.
[Guest]: And so my hair is just going to cover my face because there's no light left to see.
[Guest]: That kind of intensity, that kind of passion is unheard of in whatever shubh, mangal, saavdhan,
[Guest]: zyada saavdhan, kam saavdhan, whatever it is that we want to do.
[Guest]: I'm glad it's being made.
[Guest]: But to tout that as finally India has arrived is such an act of ignorance that it boggles
[Guest]: my mind.
[Guest]: And the sense of even as we are trying to elevate India as finally arriving, we're actually
[Guest]: forgetting India and its histories in all their multiplicities.
[Guest]: And that's what is just completely mind boggling to me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also struck in all of this.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just Jamali and Kamali and you, of course, describe their tomb, showing how the
[Amit Varma]: tomb itself is both male and female.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: To go back to what we were saying earlier, when we said, you know, this desire is desire
[Guest]: and that desire is not desire.
[Guest]: One of the things I'm fascinated by is the desire of architecture.
[Guest]: And what is fascinating about this Dargah is that among Sufis, the graves are very carefully
[Guest]: delineated between male and female.
[Guest]: And so the male graves have a sort of pen box on top of them because it's understood
[Guest]: that the Sufis will write the Kalam, will use the Kalam to write.
[Guest]: And this is what they're taking with them because they're so intellectually oriented.
[Guest]: And the women Sufis have a flat top on them because the idea is that they are paper on
[Guest]: which will be written.
[Guest]: And if we sort of set aside the sort of sexist nature of that for a minute, what's fascinating
[Guest]: to me about Jamali and Kamali's Dargah is that it is flat on top, which is to say it
[Guest]: is feminine on top, whereas inside it's a dome, it's a pen box.
[Guest]: And so it's a male sign of masculinity overlaid by a sign of femininity without deciding necessarily
[Guest]: which one is the correct one or the proper one.
[Guest]: It's giving us quite literally a hermaphroditic desire.
[Amit Varma]: And you call them signs of femininity because it was a custom that the tombs of female saints
[Guest]: will be flat on top and the men will have domes.
[Amit Varma]: So this very interesting sort of incorporation of both elements into the design also.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And this is this is something that continues to this day.
[Guest]: For instance, I always sort of tell my students the way in which desks and chairs are designed
[Guest]: have desire in mind when they do that.
[Guest]: So, for instance, when you go to schools, the desks will always be blank in front because
[Guest]: the assumption is that the teacher should be able to see what the students are doing
[Guest]: with their hands and between their legs, whereas the older you get.
[Guest]: And so, for instance, if you're a professor in an office or if you're an older student,
[Guest]: the desks will have what are known officially this is a technical term as modesty panels.
[Guest]: The covering of the front of the table is known as a modesty panel because the assumption
[Guest]: is you should be able to free to do whatever you want behind that table without anyone
[Guest]: seeing you.
[Guest]: So everything around us is articulated in relation to desire.
[Guest]: And that was one of the things I was just fascinated by, which is that let's think about
[Guest]: everyday life.
[Guest]: Forget anything else.
[Guest]: How our everyday life is saturated with these things about desire and how the origin plays
[Amit Varma]: back to something we didn't even realize, like this is news to me, you know, and modesty
[Amit Varma]: covering is indeed a great help in my office years.
[Guest]: But maybe modesty is alien to you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Well, what can I say?
[Amit Varma]: And I also found this fascinating, I mean, this is really hilarious, where you spoke
[Guest]: about the traveling tomb of Bulleh Shah as an example of mobile desire.
[Guest]: What is this traveling tomb?
[Guest]: It's just fascinating.
[Guest]: I mean, there is a tomb of Bulleh Shah in what is now Pakistan.
[Guest]: And I'm driving down from Manali, and there's a sign saying Bulleh Shah Ji Ka Dargah.
[Guest]: And so I asked the driver, it's like, oh, my God, is this suddenly changed?
[Guest]: Are we suddenly in Pakistan?
[Guest]: Isn't this, wouldn't this be amazing?
[Guest]: And the taxi driver says, nahi, nahi, jee, yeh Bulleh Shah Ji Ka Dargah toh har jagah
[Guest]: hota hai.
[Guest]: It's anywhere you want it to be.
[Guest]: Which actually among, for instance, the Bhakti saints, there was this Namdev in Maharashtra
[Guest]: and things like that, there is a very clear sense of what's called a mobile temple, which
[Guest]: is you carry your temple with you wherever you go.
[Guest]: So you don't have to, in fact, be fixed on a temple or a particular site, which of course
[Guest]: throws new light on the entire Ram Janmabhoomi Ayodhya thing, right?
[Guest]: Which is that a fixed temple actually was not the truth of practicing religions that
[Guest]: now call themselves Hinduism.
[Guest]: Similarly, in Sufi traditions, this idea of a Dargah is both something that is there set
[Guest]: in stone, quite literally, and something that travels with you wherever you go.
[Guest]: And so people can be in love with Nizamuddin wherever they are, or people can be followers
[Guest]: of Jamali wherever they are, they don't need to be present at that physical site.
[Guest]: And that to me is something that's deeply spiritual, right?
[Guest]: That's deeply evocative in the sense of, I am, I both am and I'm not here.
[Guest]: And that kind of Sufi tradition, and I talk about that story in my book about how they
[Guest]: say the mark of a Sufi saint is someone who can preside over his own burial, right?
[Guest]: And that sense of both being here and not here, going back to Shakespeare's negative
[Guest]: capability, I'm writing, but I'm not writing myself.
[Guest]: That kind of ability I find absolutely powerful.
[Guest]: And that kind of ability is what I think encourages empathy, understanding across borders.
[Guest]: And that's what we're so in danger of losing now.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we head into a commercial break, I want to take you back to what you
[Amit Varma]: said a little earlier, which is, you know, it's not there in your book, but I found it
[Amit Varma]: fairly interesting where you were talking about the queer histories of Bollywood, for
[Amit Varma]: example.
[Amit Varma]: And this notion which I have, you know, I can see both sides of where it is coming from
[Amit Varma]: that on the one hand, I'm really glad that films like Kapoor and Sons and shows like
[Amit Varma]: Made in Heaven are being made where, you know, gay protagonists are shown as completely normal
[Amit Varma]: people with completely normal desires, and it's not like something exceptional or not
[Amit Varma]: caricatured in other ways.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, it strikes me that the reason that these specific films are like
[Amit Varma]: this is that Bollywood right now is being driven by elites.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a reflection of how the elite see themselves or how they want to see themselves.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not necessarily a reflection of popular culture necessarily, I think TikTok gets closer
[Amit Varma]: to popular culture.
[Amit Varma]: And while it's incredibly, I'm addicted to TikTok, and it's absolutely awesome.
[Amit Varma]: But it's also, you know, it also shows our society's misogyny and sexism, and all of
[Amit Varma]: these things.
[Amit Varma]: So, since you've thought more deeply about this than I have, obviously, can you elaborate
[Guest]: a little bit?
[Guest]: Actually, one thing that you said really struck a chord with me, and a friend of mine said
[Guest]: this the other day, she said, and I enjoyed Made in Heaven as much as anybody else, although
[Guest]: it took me a bit of time to get into it, but I'm really waiting for the second season to
[Guest]: come out and things like that.
[Guest]: But a friend of mine pointed out what's interesting about Made in Heaven is that the gay male
[Guest]: protagonist who finally comes out at the end, in the narrative of the story, he's the one
[Guest]: who goes out and starts a certain gay rights movement.
[Guest]: Rather than placing him within the long history of sort of queer rights movements in India,
[Guest]: he is shown as the person who is leading the way.
[Guest]: To go back to your point of a certain elite kind of narrative that sees itself as being
[Guest]: emancipated, that sees itself as being the sort of torchbearers of freedom, rather than
[Guest]: actually saying freedoms have existed in this part of the world for much longer than you
[Guest]: can even remember.
[Guest]: And what about if we go back to that rather than sort of saying, here we are in a brand
[Guest]: new direction.
[Guest]: So this idea of reinventing the wheel, as though it has never been done before, is something
[Guest]: that can be very irksome and very annoying.
[Guest]: And because I enjoyed Made in Heaven, it was not that annoying to me there, but it's annoying
[Guest]: to me in several other places.
[Guest]: I didn't love Kapoor and Sons, I didn't hate it, for instance.
[Guest]: But for me, a film like Goliyon ki Raas Leela Ram Leela is much more queer.
[Guest]: A film like Dostana is much more queer than someone that has an openly gay protagonist.
[Guest]: That is no doubt doing an important kind of work.
[Guest]: But it is also catering to a kind of identity politics that I find problematic.
[Guest]: So for instance, generations of gay men in India, like generations of gay men in the
[Guest]: US with a different relation to a different person, generations of gay men in India have
[Guest]: grown up identifying with the icon of Helen, for instance, just like generations of gay
[Guest]: men in the US have grown up identifying with the icon of Marilyn Monroe.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I had an episode with a friend of mine, Vivek Tejuja, who's just written a book
[Amit Varma]: and he spoke at length about how he grew up, you know, with Helen as his icon.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And so that kind of cross-identification is what is queer.
[Guest]: Nowadays, when you're saying, oh, gay men should look for a gay man in the narrative,
[Guest]: you're shutting down on other possibilities.
[Guest]: You're shutting down on the fact that gay men might identify with women.
[Guest]: You're shutting down on the fact that gay women might identify with men or any kinds
[Guest]: of cross-border attraction.
[Guest]: And so I see what is to be gained, but I also see what is being lost in that.
[Guest]: So every time we present a gay protagonist and pat ourselves on the back for being so
[Guest]: liberal and liberated, we also have to remember that what we're losing is that texture of
[Guest]: desire that did not predict in advance who I must identify with, that was able to leave
[Guest]: scope for cross-identification, that was able to leave scope for me as a gay man to identify
[Guest]: with a female vamp.
[Amit Varma]: That's what we're losing right now.
[Amit Varma]: Now these textures of desires are very complicated.
[Amit Varma]: The real world is very complex.
[Amit Varma]: Cinema and all popular art necessarily aims to keep it simple, simpler narratives work
[Amit Varma]: better.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the Shakespeare would disagree.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I was just going to say that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But over here, that is sort of, I mean, unless you're Shakespeare, you're not going to pull
[Amit Varma]: off complexity quite like that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you have these urges to therefore simplify the narrative, make it explicable
[Unknown]: and so on.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Which is why I'm curious about what you meant by the queer history of Bollywood per se.
[Guest]: Can you elaborate a bit on that?
[Guest]: I mean, if you just look at these films of the, of the seventies and eighties, all these
[Guest]: so-called, you know, dosti films, these yaari films, always sort of featuring two or more
[Guest]: of a cast from Amitabh Bachchan, Dharmendra, Shashi Kapoor, Rajesh Khanna.
[Guest]: And you refer to Anand, of course.
[Guest]: Of course.
[Guest]: And that's just one example where the intensity of the bond between the men, it may end up
[Guest]: in heterosexual marriage, right?
[Guest]: With Jaya Bhaduri or Hema Malini or whoever it is, but the film is about the intensity
[Guest]: of the bond between the men.
[Guest]: Now, this is where actually an analogy with Shakespeare comes in because all of Shakespeare's
[Guest]: plays, especially his comedies, will end with heterosexual couplings without question.
[Guest]: But the force of the narrative is the force of the bonds between same-sex couples.
[Guest]: So what do you do with that?
[Guest]: We have a choice, right?
[Guest]: Either we say the end justifies everything.
[Guest]: And the fact that Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bhaduri get together at the end means forget
[Guest]: anything else that happened with anybody else.
[Guest]: You can certainly do that.
[Guest]: And a lot of people have done that.
[Guest]: So people like me who are interested in The Textures of Desire, we know that the end is
[Guest]: by no means the only thing that is going on.
[Guest]: So for us, our energy is derived from the fabric of the rest of the film.
[Guest]: Like two hours and 58 minutes, these two men are staring deep into each other's eyes.
[Guest]: For two minutes at the end, you have the man and the woman together.
[Guest]: How does the one outweigh the other?
[Guest]: And so for me, if we actually take cinema seriously, the tropes of cinema seriously,
[Guest]: who is looking into whose eye, who is saying, I cannot live without you, who is saying,
[Guest]: I'm going to die if I cannot have you, quite literally in the shape of Anand, that's where
[Guest]: desire is.
[Guest]: So for instance, if you just sort of did a blind test and you say, here are a list of
[Guest]: the dialogues that character A is saying to character B, identify who character A is and
[Guest]: who character B is.
[Guest]: Most people from a heterosexist perspective will say one is a man and A is a man and B
[Guest]: is a woman.
[Guest]: And then you say, reveal A is Amitabh Bachchan and B is Rajesh Khanna.
[Guest]: What do you do with that?
[Guest]: And so this is what I'm interested in.
[Guest]: That's what I mean about the queer pasts of Bollywood is that there has been a comfort
[Guest]: with even a celebration of that mode of queerness that will not come out and say, hey, I am
[Guest]: gay, but that covers a spectrum of desire that I find more interesting and fascinating
[Guest]: than the sort of identity category mode of sexuality, which we are inhabiting today.
[Amit Varma]: I think there's also, you know, I mean, what instinctively comes to me is how should one
[Amit Varma]: distinguish sexual desire from non-sexual desire?
[Amit Varma]: Like it just seems to me, for example, looking back at Anand, which I will never view in
[Amit Varma]: the same way because of you, you have spoilt it for me, or perhaps you made it better for
[Amit Varma]: me, who knows.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems to me that it doesn't come across as sexual desire in the film, certainly not
[Amit Varma]: as overtly sexual desire, or maybe my gaze was wrong, and I'll see differently now, regardless.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, is there a danger that when you're sort of, let's say that as a scholar,
[Amit Varma]: when you're looking at that kind of cinema, and you're studying queer cinema, is there
[Amit Varma]: a danger of looking too much and reading into, like, I remember, you know, when I was a teenager,
[Amit Varma]: I saw the film Dead Poets Society, which is such a lovely film, and I absolutely loved
[Amit Varma]: it then.
[Amit Varma]: And then I came across a review in some esoteric magazine, which spoke about the suppressed
[Amit Varma]: homoerotic desire in the film.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, what is this rubbish?
[Amit Varma]: These are people who are over-interpreting, over-analyzing.
[Guest]: Is that a danger?
[Guest]: You know, what always fascinates me about questions like this, and I think it's a very
[Guest]: good question, because the question a lot of people have.
[Guest]: What fascinates me about these kinds of questions is the implicit assumption that my reading
[Guest]: is just the right amount of reading.
[Guest]: And somebody else's reading is over-interpreting or over-reading, and it's too much or excessive.
[Guest]: And that seems to me to emerge always from a position in which my reading is challenged,
[Guest]: or my reading is shown perhaps to be inadequate to the material at hand.
[Guest]: So I don't think there is any such thing as over-interpretation.
[Guest]: I certainly think there are wrong readings or bad readings, but I don't think there's
[Guest]: anything known as over-interpretation, as opposed to just right interpretation.
[Guest]: I think all interpretation is reading into the material.
[Guest]: You're always interpreting in a certain way.
[Guest]: We've all grown up in such a misogynistic, heterosexist framework that that kind of reading
[Guest]: appears normal to us.
[Guest]: And I'm including myself in this 100%.
[Guest]: And that kind of reading appears normal to us precisely because we've always been told
[Guest]: that is the truth.
[Guest]: You don't need to think about it.
[Guest]: Again, back to truth with a capital T.
[Guest]: If, however, and this is what I guess we're all banking on, if we allow the truths of
[Guest]: our lived reality to trump that singular emphasis on truth with a capital T, we can read much
[Guest]: more widely than we usually do.
[Guest]: Now the best way, for instance, I always tell people, the best way to lose friends is to
[Guest]: go to a film with them.
[Guest]: And when they say, oh, I really loved it, you say, yes, but what about this that happened
[Guest]: there?
[Amit Varma]: I just went to get entertained.
[Guest]: Are you that person?
[Guest]: I am that person.
[Guest]: But I still have lots of friends, thank God.
[Guest]: But to me, that is what is reading, right?
[Guest]: That we are always reading films.
[Guest]: But what does it mean to oppose a reading that is not given to us, that we are coming
[Guest]: up with, rather than just inheriting a misogynistic, heterosexist framework and say, but this is
[Guest]: about love between a man and a woman.
[Guest]: Which brings me back to something you said a little bit earlier before this question,
[Guest]: which is that how do we know it's sexual desire?
[Guest]: My answer to that very clearly is we don't.
[Guest]: We have no idea.
[Guest]: But then my question to you would be, how do we know what sexual desire is?
[Guest]: Do we understand sexual desire as meaning genital intercourse?
[Guest]: Clearly not, because there are lots of people who feel sexual desire for others who never
[Guest]: have genital sex with them, right?
[Guest]: So that's not what we mean.
[Guest]: What we mean by sexual desire is a desire that wants some kind of physical consummation.
[Guest]: What does that mean?
[Guest]: Arm around the shoulder, pat on the back, holding hands, kissing, hugging, whatever
[Guest]: it is, other than kissing, all these things these two men do, if that's the lens through
[Guest]: which we're looking at.
[Guest]: What we generally understand by sexual desire, in fact, is not shown in any Hindi cinema.
[Guest]: You never see, at least in the 70s and 80s, you never ever saw men and women having sex.
[Guest]: What you saw were tropes of desire, the flower falling, the shirt untucked, the door that
[Guest]: is hastily slammed shut, the tie that is askew, the bindi that is rubbed off.
[Guest]: All these are there.
[Guest]: I mean, Rajesh Khanna is often looking disheveled.
[Guest]: He's often looking sort of, you know, and Amitabh Bachchan is often looking deep into
[Guest]: his eyes.
[Guest]: We would normally understand that as a sign of sexual love.
[Guest]: When these two men are looking into each other's eyes, why do we not read that as sexual love?
[Guest]: It's a question for us, not a question for the film.
[Amit Varma]: And as we go into a commercial break, I'll leave you with the reimagining of a film dialogue
[Amit Varma]: inspired by Madhavi.
[Amit Varma]: So if you don't like it, blame Madhavi.
[Amit Varma]: This is that classic scene where Amitabh Bachchan asks Shashi Kapoor, mere paas ghar hai, gari
[Amit Varma]: hai, ye hai, wo hai, tumhare paas kya hai, and Shashi Kapoor replies, mere paas condom
[Amit Varma]: hai.
[Amit Varma]: See you after a commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into products of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and dresses for women and evening shirts for men,
[Amit Varma]: home decor like wall plates, cushion covers and table linen, and accessories like tote
[Amit Varma]: bags and pencil pouches.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Dhruvi Acharya, Jaideep Mehrotra, Madhuri Kathe,
[Amit Varma]: Sameer Mondal, Brinda Miller, Tanmay Samanta, TM Aziz, and Manisha Gehra Baswani.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting.
[Amit Varma]: But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 15% discount, apply the code unseen, U-N-S-E-E-N.
[Amit Varma]: That's unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: We are chatting with Madhavi Menon about The Scene and The Unseen of Human Desire.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so before we went to the break, you were telling me about how Bollywood has
[Amit Varma]: all these tropes to not show sex, for example, you know, whatever the two roses kissing and
[Amit Varma]: the closed door and the bindi out of place.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me while reading your book, that our mythology has these as well, because
[Amit Varma]: the gods are never actually shown reproducing.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the finest stories that you have outlined at length, and I shall ask
[Amit Varma]: you to do so again, is the story of Ayyappa, you know, right from his origin story to everything
[Amit Varma]: that happens with him, is mind blowing and is extremely relevant to our times as well,
[Amit Varma]: because Ayyappa is the god at Sabarimala.
[Amit Varma]: That's what the first is all about.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Guest]: So take us through a bit of that.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: Amit, I see you're sort of hellbent on getting me into trouble, but that's okay.
[Amit Varma]: We'll both get into trouble.
[Amit Varma]: I'm used to that.
[Amit Varma]: This podcast has gone on for more than an hour.
[Amit Varma]: I do not think that, you know.
[Amit Varma]: They would have got to this point.
[Guest]: Exactly. Well, I've already gotten into trouble about this.
[Guest]: I wrote an article on this in the Indian Express, and I had a police complaint filed against
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: Are you serious?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Which luckily has not yet been converted into an FIR.
[Guest]: So I'm just hoping it stays that way.
[Guest]: And the complaint said, of course, I had outraged, hurt, insulted, one of those words, the sentiments
[Guest]: of lakhs and lakhs of Hindus, which I actually found funny, because the person thought they
[Guest]: were just lakhs of Hindus, rather than millions, or hundreds of millions, who are these lakhs
[Amit Varma]: of Hindus?
[Amit Varma]: You felt offended.
[Amit Varma]: I have only offended so many people.
[Guest]: I must be doing something wrong.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Let me go on Amit's show and rectify that, exactly, exactly.
[Guest]: I mean, and also part of the problem, of course, is this classification of Hindus, which, you
[Guest]: know, I don't need to talk about right now.
[Guest]: But the story of Ayyappan is just fascinating.
[Guest]: And as you just said, he is the presiding deity at this place of worship called Sabarimala
[Guest]: in Kerala, and is the presiding deity.
[Guest]: And I have known him all my life, because my maternal family, my mother's family, have
[Guest]: been Ayyappan devotees for a long time.
[Guest]: So my grandfather, my maternal grandfather, I don't know, made that pilgrimage over 30
[Guest]: times to Sabarimala, and in fact, wanted to take us as well.
[Guest]: And my sister and I were taken, went along with my father and grandfather, when I was
[Guest]: eight years old.
[Guest]: And I like sort of scandalizing people by saying, I am a woman who has been to Sabarimala,
[Guest]: and I was bleeding when I went.
[Guest]: But of course, the story is that a leech had attached itself to my foot, and so I was bleeding
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: Non-sanskari leech.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And the lecherous leech.
[Guest]: So I went when I was seven or eight years old.
[Guest]: And so Ayyappan and the Sabarimala temple has been a part of my upbringing, I mean,
[Guest]: part of everyday life.
[Guest]: So it was fascinating to me, this entire court case that has, the way it's played out over
[Guest]: the last two or three years, because I was very glad that someone had filed a case against
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I mean, I am not enough of a believer in pilgrimages to have been outraged by that.
[Guest]: But there was something, I'm so glad that this happened, and I'm very glad the Supreme
[Guest]: Court ruled the way it did, even though it seems to make no difference because the government
[Guest]: is still not allowing women of menstruating age to enter through the front steps.
[Guest]: So what I wrote about Ayyappan, the article that got me into trouble, is that the fundamental
[Guest]: premise behind people who do not want women of menstruating age in the temple, the fundamental
[Guest]: premise of those people are that Ayyappan is a celibate God, which is to say, and this
[Guest]: is the fundamental assumption number two, that Ayyappan as a male God is going to be
[Guest]: attracted to women.
[Guest]: And menstruating women, because they are sexually active, will be the ones to tempt Ayyappan,
[Guest]: the male celibate God.
[Guest]: So you see the number of assumptions going on here.
[Guest]: And this ties back to our earlier conversations, what we take to a conversation that we regard
[Guest]: as normal are just assumptions we've never been told to think about.
[Guest]: So the assumption of heterosexuality is just rampant here.
[Guest]: Ayyappan, male God, should not see women because his celibacy should not be challenged.
[Guest]: And such a weak God that we need to protect.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Who was it?
[Guest]: Shashi Tharoor who said, there was a time when we thought the gods would protect us,
[Guest]: and now we feel that we need to protect the gods.
[Guest]: And so that's the fundamental premise.
[Guest]: And what I find fascinating is that there is actually nothing in Ayyappan's mythological
[Guest]: stories or histories to suggest heterosexuality in the least.
[Guest]: Now, this is not to say he is or is not heterosexual.
[Guest]: I'm actually not interested in that.
[Guest]: But it is to say that if heterosexuality is the fundamental belief with which people are
[Guest]: being monitored, can you show me where that belief is coming from?
[Guest]: And so there are three stories about Ayyappan that we know.
[Guest]: They're all mythological, of course, like all the stories of our gods are.
[Guest]: But there are three stories.
[Guest]: And as I said, none of them points in the direction of heterosexuality.
[Guest]: The first, of course, an origin story is that Ayyappan is the son of two men.
[Guest]: He's the son of Shiva and Vishnu, Vishnu in drag as Mohini.
[Guest]: You know, as you know, Mohini is brought into being to defeat the demon so that the gods
[Guest]: can churn the nectar and steal the nectar for themselves.
[Guest]: I mean, what is wonderful about the pantheon of Hindu gods is that they're always up to
[Guest]: no good, always up to mischief, always cheating, always doing this.
[Amit Varma]: It's great.
[Amit Varma]: Our gods are awesome.
[Amit Varma]: Our gods are so much cooler than the people who follow them.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Never a dull moment.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It's just all fun all the time.
[Guest]: And so Shiva and Vishnu, Vishnu takes on the avatar of Mohini, destroys this demon called
[Guest]: Tarakasura, who is actually threatening Shiva.
[Guest]: Shiva is hidden in a tree trunk, Mohini does her charm, and then Mohini turns back into
[Amit Varma]: Vishnu.
[Amit Varma]: And I found even the origin story of the origin story very funny, the way you told it.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: That this demon went to Shiva and said, kindly give me a boon, everything I turn should turn
[Amit Varma]: to ash.
[Amit Varma]: And Shiva is like chilling and all, he says, fine.
[Amit Varma]: And then this guy starts chasing Shiva.
[Amit Varma]: To touch him.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And Shiva goes up a tree and he tells Vishnu, come and help me.
[Guest]: Please come and help me.
[Guest]: So Vishnu comes as Mohini destroys Tarakasura by making him touch himself.
[Guest]: So he turns to ash.
[Guest]: And then Vishnu says, done and dusted, I'm back now as Vishnu.
[Guest]: And Shiva comes out and says, thanks so much.
[Guest]: But you know, I got a dim glimpse of you as Mohini and you were really sexy.
[Guest]: So can you just sort of turn back into Mohini again?
[Guest]: And so Vishnu says, sure, no problem.
[Guest]: I actually love, I love all that stuff.
[Guest]: Becomes Mohini and Shiva is so excited, he spills his semen, right?
[Guest]: That's one of the secrets about our gods is that they never actually have genital intercourse.
[Guest]: It's always the sun inseminated the rock or the river.
[Guest]: Semen is spilt here.
[Guest]: So it's always that kind of.
[Guest]: So again, to go back to what counts as sexual desire, you know, it's a desire for a rock
[Guest]: in many cases.
[Guest]: Shiva spills his semen, off that comes the person who becomes Ayyappan, right?
[Guest]: In different avatars.
[Guest]: So Ayyappan is the son of Shiva and Vishnu in drag as Mohini.
[Guest]: The son of two men.
[Guest]: The second story we know about Ayyappan, for a fact, is that his best friend forever, his
[Guest]: BFF, is a Muslim pirate called Babur.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact.
[Amit Varma]: Bengalis call Babur.
[Amit Varma]: I'm half Bengali, so self-deprecating, kindly do not be offended if you are some Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: person listening to this.
[Amit Varma]: I am also Bengali.
[Guest]: Lakhs of Mukherjees.
[Amit Varma]: Babur.
[Amit Varma]: Lakhs and lakhs of Mukherjees.
[Guest]: But anyway, so Babur, in fact, they are so close that the pilgrimage in Sabarimala, you
[Guest]: have to start from the mosque of Babur, dedicated to Babur, and then go up to Sabarimala.
[Guest]: So in fact, you cannot worship Ayyappan without worshipping Babur.
[Guest]: And again, stories of how they got together, whether they fought together, all that is
[Guest]: the multiple stories.
[Guest]: But we do have a story in which Ayyappan tells his father, please treat Babur as you would
[Guest]: treat me.
[Guest]: And the sense of we are one, again talking about tropes of romance, is very much one
[Guest]: between Ayyappan and Babur.
[Guest]: And just as a slight sidebar, the worship of Babur being an absolute necessary prelude
[Guest]: to a worship of Ayyappan just shows you what a syncretic, pluralistic monument Sabarimala
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: It has also historically been one of the few temples in Kerala that has never had prohibitions
[Guest]: on caste, which is why the prohibition on women makes so little sense, but I'll come
[Guest]: back to that later.
[Guest]: So that's the second story.
[Guest]: His best friend is Babur.
[Guest]: The third story now, perhaps most fascinating of all, is that Ayyappan says, build me this
[Guest]: temple.
[Guest]: Here is my statue, and I'm going to go up to heaven.
[Guest]: Goes up to heaven, because he's the son of Shiva and Vishnu, he's the elite, right?
[Guest]: His elite god, and is soon set to sort of take over control of the heaven.
[Amit Varma]: He's Lutyens' elite in heaven.
[Unknown]: Lots of real estate, right?
[Guest]: And so he's set over to take over the heavens, and he has one grand plan.
[Guest]: He said, my grand plan is, I want to abolish both birth and death.
[Guest]: Because if we don't die, then we won't need to give birth to more people, because we give
[Guest]: birth to children, because we fear we will die, and then we want someone to continue
[Guest]: after us.
[Guest]: But if we're not going to die, why bother giving birth to children?
[Guest]: We can just enjoy ourselves throughout our life.
[Guest]: So he sort of starts thinking about, how can I execute this plan?
[Guest]: And the other gods start getting worried, because they know that most of the offerings
[Guest]: that come to them come because people don't want to die, and because people want to give
[Guest]: birth.
[Guest]: And they said, if we abolish birth and death, what the hell is going to happen to our revenues?
[Guest]: So they send Narada to Ayyappan and says, please, get him to change his mind, distract
[Guest]: him, take him away from this idea, it's a bad idea.
[Guest]: So Narada goes to Ayyappan and says, excuse me, can I have a minute with you?
[Guest]: And Ayyappan says, you know, I'm really busy right now, I'm coming up with this plan of
[Guest]: abolishing birth and death, you know, it'll take me a few months, maybe after that you
[Guest]: and I can chat, coffee sometime, right?
[Guest]: And Narada says, no, no, no, it'll just take two minutes right now, please, please, please.
[Guest]: So Ayyappan, being a nice, kind-hearted guy says, okay, sets aside his blueprints and
[Guest]: said, okay, what is it?
[Guest]: So Narada says, I have just one question for you, Ayyappan said, okay, what?
[Guest]: He says, can you tell me how you are related to your father's wife and your mother's wife?
[Guest]: And legend has it that Ayyappan was so perplexed by that question, that he in fact came back
[Guest]: down to earth into his temple at Sabarimala, where he continues to this day, because he
[Guest]: has still not found an answer to that question, right?
[Guest]: If you think about it for a second, right, father's wife, Parvati, okay, you can say
[Guest]: she's my stepmother, she's my father's wife, but not my mother, this, that, and the other.
[Guest]: Vishnu's wife, first of all, is Vishnu my mother or is Mohini my mother?
[Guest]: Is Vishnu my mother in drag as a man?
[Guest]: So is my mother really a father?
[Guest]: And then is my father's wife or consort Lakshmi, what is she?
[Guest]: Is she the wife of my mother or my father?
[Amit Varma]: He's still trying to work out those permutations.
[Amit Varma]: Or is the rock my mother?
[Guest]: Is the rock my mother or the tree trunk or whatever, right?
[Guest]: And so the idea of sexual indeterminacy is written into the very legend of Ayyappan at
[Guest]: every level that we know about him.
[Guest]: So to presume that this man, son of two men, deeply enmeshed with another man, wanting
[Guest]: to abolish birth and death, should be the presider of heterosexuality.
[Guest]: It's like, where is this coming from?
[Guest]: And it is coming, of course, as I dared to answer, from us.
[Guest]: That answer of Ayyappan is a male heterosexual God who is celibate is coming from male Brahminical
[Guest]: priests at Sabarimala.
[Guest]: And you know, in any court of law anywhere in the world, your first question in a criminal
[Guest]: case is who stands to gain?
[Guest]: The only people who stand to gain here are the male priests and what they think of as
[Guest]: their tradition.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it could be argued that they have literally imprisoned their God.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Whereas the traditions as we know it in relation to Ayyappan all set him free, which is why
[Guest]: Sabarimala is usually such a wonderfully open, syncretic place.
[Guest]: No barrier on caste, no barrier on religion.
[Guest]: The only barrier is misogynistic.
[Guest]: And I just find that shocking.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed.
[Amit Varma]: And while talking about Ayyappan and Vavar, you spoke about how Ayyappan went to his dad
[Amit Varma]: and said that, you know, my BFF Vavar or whatever, treat us as one.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you have a very interesting chapter in your book, and this is actually
[Amit Varma]: chapter 1.5 called Fractions, where you sort of militate against this notion of two people
[Amit Varma]: being treated as one.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you refer back to Aristophanes, who is asked to, you know, sort of talk about
[Amit Varma]: desire.
[Amit Varma]: And Aristophanes said that, you know, man and woman was once joined and they were separated.
[Amit Varma]: So now the two are trying to become one again, which is that whole romantic notion.
[Amit Varma]: But you point out that all desire isn't like that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and in fact, I often, you know, these days, people are talking about the uniform
[Amit Varma]: civil code coming into action at some point in time and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I have always thought that in a utopian world, you would not have a civil code at
[Amit Varma]: all.
[Amit Varma]: You would have individuals freely associating with themselves in whatever way, drawing up
[Amit Varma]: their own marriage deeds, if they so desire, without the state being involved.
[Amit Varma]: And why just two individuals?
[Amit Varma]: It could be three individuals or four individuals, you know, voluntary exchange.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: The one thing that I would add to your recounting of my Greek story from Plato, Aristophanes's
[Guest]: idea is that we were all double once.
[Guest]: And it was not only men and women who were joined, men and women were only one third
[Guest]: of those who were joined.
[Guest]: Another category were men and men, another category were women and women.
[Guest]: And so, and these human beings, doubled human beings became so strong that the gods became
[Guest]: jealous.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Greek gods are also quite as fascinating as our gods because they're also up to machinations
[Guest]: all the time.
[Guest]: And the gods say, let's divide them and half their power.
[Guest]: So everyone gets divided.
[Guest]: And so according to this myth, that is why we keep saying we're searching for our other
[Guest]: half because we once used to be double and we've been divided.
[Guest]: But that still sticks, as I point out with this idea of whole numbers and has given rise
[Guest]: to this entire thing of one plus one equals one.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I and my lover come together and we are one because we're actually half and half that
[Guest]: come together as one, two becomes one and one plus one becomes one.
[Guest]: This is the mathematics of love, if you will have it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I've always been interested.
[Guest]: Remember I said at the very beginning, I'm interested in things that people don't like
[Guest]: to think about.
[Guest]: We like to think about whole numbers, but what about the things between these two numbers?
[Guest]: And so I was always fascinated.
[Guest]: If one plus one equals one, what about one plus half or half plus three quarters?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: If we had to measure our mathematical investment in our partners, it probably won't be whole.
[Guest]: You're thinking about 55 other things, about 65 other people.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So if we're doing this mathematically, what is it?
[Guest]: How much is it that we are in this relationship?
[Guest]: So when this film going back to Bollywood came out, it just fascinated me because here
[Guest]: is a film that is actually talking about ishq in relation, not to whole numbers, but to
[Guest]: a fraction.
[Guest]: And this is how I say Bollywood can really be brilliant without necessarily saying here
[Guest]: is a gay character.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And, you know, this is going to be a spoiler alert.
[Guest]: Anyone who has not seen it, please fast forward the next five minutes.
[Amit Varma]: But even if you give a spoiler, we have agreed it's the journey and not the destination.
[Guest]: There you go.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the the point of Dehdish Kiya is that these two women are lovers, but we don't know that
[Guest]: in the film at all because the two women also have two men, Nasruddin Shah and Arshad Warsi.
[Guest]: The women are Madhuri Dixit and Richa Chadda.
[Guest]: We always are pairing up these two, man, woman, man, woman, and completely blind to the possibility
[Guest]: that it might be the two women together.
[Guest]: And so the joke is on us at the end of the film when we finally realize, oh, my God,
[Guest]: it's the two women who are together.
[Guest]: Because what that shows us is that to go back to our earlier conversation, we have been
[Guest]: looking from a perspective that seems so commonplace, that seems so right that we don't think about
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Guest]: So the revelation in the film is not about the characters, it's about the viewers.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And, you know, this film is based on an Ismat Chugtai short story called Lihav, The Quilt,
[Guest]: which, as you know, is famous now.
[Guest]: But my favorite story about Lihav is that Chugtai had a case filed against her.
[Guest]: Mantu had a case filed against him similarly, I think, for a Kali Shalwar or something of
[Guest]: the kind.
[Guest]: They both traveled to Lahore together in 1942 to appear before the court.
[Guest]: And it's still the British High Court, Lahore High Court.
[Guest]: And the charge is obscenity against Lihav.
[Guest]: And Ismat Chugtai's lawyer gets her off because he asks every witness for the prosecution,
[Guest]: OK, you have alleged that this is an obscene story.
[Guest]: Can you point to a single word in the story that's obscene?
[Guest]: And none of the witnesses could do that.
[Guest]: And so the judge said, well, if you can't point to a single word that's obscene, let's
[Guest]: get rid of this.
[Guest]: And that, to me, is the beauty of this tale, because there is no word like gay, lesbian,
[Guest]: sex, nothing.
[Guest]: Yet here is the canonical love story between two women in our culture.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a masterpiece of subtlety.
[Amit Varma]: Can you tell our listeners, you know, briefly what it's about?
[Guest]: I mean, it is stunning.
[Guest]: It is about this woman, Begum Jaan, and her maid, Rabbu, which is exactly the template
[Guest]: that's recreated in Dedesh Kiya.
[Guest]: Begum Jaan is married to a man who we would now call a gay man, who is interested only
[Guest]: in young men and sort of spent all his money on them.
[Guest]: The assumption is that they never had sex, never consummate their relationship.
[Guest]: And the story goes on about how Begum Jaan is wilting with each passing day.
[Guest]: And she develops what the story evocatively and brilliantly calls an itch.
[Guest]: So she develops an itch and she's scratching herself all the time, called the doctors and
[Guest]: the doctors say, there's nothing wrong with you.
[Guest]: We don't know where this itch is coming from.
[Guest]: But she's in agony.
[Guest]: She's in pain.
[Guest]: She's in distress until the maid, Rabbu, comes and says, I can give you a massage.
[Guest]: I can press you in a way that the itch will disappear.
[Guest]: And the story is narrated about how Rabbu's massages cure the Begum entirely.
[Guest]: And she blossoms and glows and looks delighted.
[Guest]: Now this entire story is being told from the vantage point of a 10-year-old girl who is
[Guest]: Begum Jaan's niece.
[Guest]: And so she says, what is all this massaging going on?
[Guest]: I don't understand it, but Begum Jaan seems to love it.
[Guest]: And the story is about how she's sleeping in Begum Jaan's room at night in a cot like
[Guest]: we all do, you know, relative sleep in the same room.
[Guest]: But Rabbu is also in the same bed giving Begum Jaan a massage and how the little child wakes
[Guest]: up in the middle of the night and sees the lihaaf, the razae, the quilt, rising and falling
[Guest]: in interesting shapes because of the activity going on underneath it.
[Guest]: And till the end of the story, she has no idea what's going on.
[Guest]: So what are you going to say?
[Guest]: Razae is obscene, lihaaf is obscene, itch is obscene.
[Guest]: What do you say?
[Guest]: But you put all these together and you have a clear story about the lack of sexual satisfaction
[Guest]: and then the consummation of sexual desire.
[Guest]: And so Chukta's brilliance, and the lawyer's brilliance actually, is to say, what do you
[Guest]: think of as obscene cannot always be named?
[Guest]: Which takes us back to that entire conversation about identity politics and categories of
[Guest]: naming.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: What do you lose when you name and what do you gain without a name?
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking about what seems beautiful about the story is that it also seems to illustrate
[Amit Varma]: what Marshall McLuhan said about the medium being the message.
[Amit Varma]: Because what is so beautiful about the story is not just what happens, but the way it is
[Amit Varma]: told.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And that interplay with the viewer where, you know, you get everything and yet don't
[Amit Varma]: get anything.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and you would have more Danish gear, I'll quickly sort of quote these words
[Amit Varma]: from your book, which sort of make it explicit what you just said, quote, the film is operating
[Amit Varma]: on three basic principles of desire that affect us all.
[Amit Varma]: First, it shows how easy it is to see heterosexual couples everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Second, it shows us that non-coupled, non-normative desires are everywhere around us, even if
[Amit Varma]: we don't know how to see them.
[Amit Varma]: The third principle with which the film works, there is always more and less to desire than
[Amit Varma]: meets the eye, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I was also sort of, and I wonder when you say that, you know, the second principle,
[Amit Varma]: that it shows us that non-coupled, non-normative desires are everywhere around us, even if
[Amit Varma]: we don't know how to see them.
[Amit Varma]: Would it also then hold that even when we don't know how to see them in us?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So if we stick with the first part right now, you know, there's a park outside the studio
[Guest]: with benches and in Delhi, winter sun, of course, there are always people sitting there.
[Guest]: And I have a fantastic photo that I took of three men on that bench, watching something
[Guest]: on a phone, one of the guy's phone.
[Guest]: Definitely TikTok.
[Guest]: Oh really?
[Guest]: And they are completely intertwined, like arms around each other.
[Guest]: One guy's leg is over the other guy's thigh, completely immersed in this video, which could
[Guest]: well have been of a woman dancing.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: But their body language, any other so-called developed country in the world that outlaws
[Guest]: homosexuality, they'd be arrested right there on the spot.
[Guest]: So for me, yes, we don't know how to see, and we don't know what it is that we're seeing,
[Guest]: because they might be perfectly heterosexual, or they might be perfectly homosexual, or
[Guest]: they might be a bit of both.
[Guest]: We don't know what we're seeing, but imposing normativity on everything that we see, which
[Guest]: is exactly what we do with ourselves.
[Guest]: So I was asked last week, I was in Trivandrum for the Lit Fest there, and I was asked, what
[Guest]: do we do when we go into rural areas?
[Guest]: And this was by an activist, extremely well-meaning, lovely guy.
[Guest]: He said, what do we do when we go into rural areas and people don't want to identify themselves
[Guest]: as gay?
[Guest]: Isn't that a setback to the gay movement, and this, that, and the other?
[Guest]: And I said very clearly, millions of people in India do not even know the word gay.
[Guest]: There are men who have sex with men who have no idea what homosexuality is, and that's
[Guest]: exactly as it should be, because the whole force of a queer politics is that we don't
[Guest]: always have to name everything, that there are things that elude naming.
[Guest]: So I could be a woman who thinks of myself as heterosexual, who is married to a man,
[Guest]: but who might suddenly have a desire for a woman, right?
[Guest]: This was the big scandal of Deepa Mehta's fire, like how are these two women, heterosexual
[Guest]: women, married to two men, suddenly coming together?
[Guest]: So we don't know where desire will emerge from within us, let alone within others.
[Guest]: And so if we name ourselves X, we are going to be bound by it in a way that I don't think
[Guest]: is necessarily healthy or desirable, that we have to be able to say, the name is not
[Guest]: me, that there are desires here that I can't name, that escape naming, and that's what
[Amit Varma]: makes them so sexy.
[Amit Varma]: Which is also hard at a human level, because I think how we make sense of the world is
[Amit Varma]: by simplifying it with narratives and taxonomies and actually naming things and putting them
[Amit Varma]: into categories or pigeonholes, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So it seems that that is also hard to pull off, especially when the culture is sort of
[Amit Varma]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: One of the other revelations of the book, which I should have known, but I didn't know,
[Amit Varma]: is Shakuntala Devi's history, and everyone thinks of her as, you know, a genius mathematician.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same age that, in the same year that she pulled off one of her great mathematical
[Unknown]: feats, which I have already forgotten, she published a book called The World of Homosexuals.
[Amit Varma]: And she was, of course, married and later divorced to a homosexual, but she responded
[Amit Varma]: to this with, not with anger, but empathy, and wrote this book in which she said the
[Amit Varma]: following words, quote, heterosexual society dictates to the world how people should live
[Amit Varma]: and what they should do.
[Amit Varma]: Heterosexual society is based mostly on authoritarianism.
[Amit Varma]: The authoritarians are judges, priests and professors, and their weapons of control are
[Amit Varma]: guilt, justice, punishment, and fear, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Strong words.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Which kind of, yeah.
[Unknown]: And this was 1977.
[Unknown]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Pretty freaky.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the next sort of question is something.
[Amit Varma]: Can I just sort of address something you just said?
[Amit Varma]: Sure, sure.
[Guest]: When you said that human life, you know, we want to simplify it, we want to have taxonomies
[Guest]: and categories.
[Guest]: And you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: We always do.
[Guest]: The reason I'm fascinated by desire rather than, let's say, zoology, which is also very
[Guest]: taxonomic and very categorical, is that desire has always, for as long as we've known, across
[Guest]: cultures, always defied taxonomy.
[Guest]: So what is it about this thing, this multi-leveled, multi-headed hydra that we have been trying
[Guest]: to tame for centuries and have not managed to tame?
[Guest]: That's why I think it continues to provide such rich material for thought and conversation
[Guest]: and scholarship is actually, for instance, if you think about laws, the number of laws
[Guest]: that are in place to try and police desire, what is this thing that is so scary?
[Guest]: And why does it resist taxonomy?
[Guest]: So I just want to sort of say, in that sense, desire is more resistant to taxonomy than
[Guest]: we would like to think it is.
[Guest]: And that's what makes it fascinating, which is also why it's sad when we think that our
[Guest]: liberation lies in taxonomizing it, that our liberation lies in coming up with more and
[Guest]: more names to describe what we are, rather than allowing namelessness or un-namability
[Amit Varma]: to be one of those possibilities.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very profound insight.
[Amit Varma]: And just going back to zoology, it strikes me that if you look at a cow, a cow being
[Amit Varma]: a cow doesn't depend on how you look at it, it doesn't depend on how a cow looks at itself,
[Amit Varma]: and it doesn't depend on what the law says it is.
[Amit Varma]: But all of these different factors affect any kind of desire, obviously.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me since you brought laws up, I think one of the issues that confuses
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people is that we tend to conflate legality with morality, and that shapes and
[Amit Varma]: changes society.
[Amit Varma]: So you can have, as the British did when they came in with the IPC, that you can have a
[Amit Varma]: codification of laws that is imposed from top down, and which hasn't come up organically,
[Amit Varma]: and yet it changes society because, you know, the coercive nature of the power of the state
[Amit Varma]: is going to impose a lot of that.
[Guest]: I mean, to give you one example, Amit, well, I mean, there are actually two, but let me
[Guest]: give you one example, 377, right, the judgment about 377, which, let me just say upfront
[Guest]: is wonderful.
[Guest]: I'm really glad it happened.
[Guest]: It was long overdue.
[Guest]: And I'm just relieved that we are now living in a country where 377 has been read down.
[Guest]: But even though it was a victory for us, for me, it was also a bit of a defeat.
[Guest]: Because you see, 377, you remember the wording of it under Macaulay's instructions in the
[Guest]: IPC, is it bans carnal acts against the law of nature.
[Guest]: Now, successive judges have interpreted law of nature to mean reproduction, anything resulting
[Guest]: in reproduction, which is to say, anybody in the world who is sexually active performs
[Guest]: acts against the laws of nature, because not every sexual act results in reproduction,
[Guest]: every single person.
[Guest]: Now, 377 was for a variety of reasons, equated more and more narrowly with male homosexuality
[Guest]: in India, not even female homosexuality so much.
[Guest]: And so the way in which the legal team, the wonderful legal team that won the case finally
[Guest]: in the Supreme Court, fought the case, is by saying this is discriminatory to homosexuals
[Guest]: in India, which at one level of police harassment was absolutely true.
[Guest]: But at another level, and this is where I think we lost the battle, it is true as a
[Guest]: law, it is true about every single sexually active person in this country.
[Guest]: So for instance, the first Supreme Court bench that overturned the Delhi High Court ruling,
[Guest]: and that Supreme Court ruling was so phobic, including a sitting judge of the Supreme Court
[Guest]: saying in open court, he said, I do not know a single gay man, therefore, I don't think
[Guest]: this affects that many people in this country.
[Guest]: The reason he's able to say that is because we have so narrowed our definitions about
[Guest]: who this law affects, that he's able to make that kind of phobic statement and get away
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: If everyone in that courtroom had stood up and said, I perform acts against nature, carnal
[Guest]: acts against the order of nature, what would that judge have done?
[Guest]: Because in fact, it is true that every one of us is affected by this, right?
[Guest]: And these are very, these are two different ways of approaching the question of desire
[Guest]: and of sexuality, which is one is the minoritizing narrative, where you say sort of sexual identities
[Guest]: are minority demographics, and the universalizing narrative where you say desire equally stuns
[Guest]: all of us, equally undoes us all.
[Guest]: And so rather than saying, ghettoizing particular sexual identities, and therefore allowing
[Guest]: one to be triumphant, we say all sexual identities are just all over the place and cannot be
[Guest]: pinned down.
[Guest]: So for me, the triumph of 377, which was based on a minoritizing narrative, lost the battle
[Guest]: of the universalizing impulse.
[Guest]: And for me, that is an actual loss as well.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it strikes me also, you know, just the phrase against the order of nature, commits
[Amit Varma]: both a historical fallacy in claiming, in implying that heterosexuality is what is normal
[Amit Varma]: and nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: And also the naturalistic fallacy in making the connection that if it only what is natural
[Amit Varma]: is right, which is also, you know, obviously, not the case, you know, so you were speaking
[Amit Varma]: in this about one of the reasons about why it's against the act of nature is that it
[Amit Varma]: doesn't lead to reproduction.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk of reproduction for a bit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it strikes me like, you know, you have a great chapter on celibacy, right?
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that a lot of the people who choose celibacy are in a sense trying
[Amit Varma]: to move, are trying to get away from the way their desires are governed.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that in the modern age, with birth control, which therefore liberates
[Amit Varma]: all of us from having to worry about reproduction, but especially women, that you can now give
[Amit Varma]: free rein to your desires and you're not bound by that.
[Amit Varma]: Has that therefore changed the way that our desires are now expressed and can be expressed?
[Guest]: Ah, but you see what you're underestimating, which I know you don't, but in that question
[Guest]: you're underestimating, is the social pressure, right?
[Guest]: So of course, we can say women, you are free now, you can have birth control, men, you
[Guest]: should use condoms like Shashi Kapoor in relation to Amitabh Bachchan, but it simply doesn't
[Guest]: happen, right?
[Guest]: The first question you're asked within a month or two of getting married is, when are you
[Guest]: going to have children?
[Guest]: I think one of the most criminal developments in our country is that on every street corner
[Guest]: now in cities, you can see IBF clinics, as though what we are suffering from is a lack
[Guest]: of population, right?
[Guest]: So the social pressure to have children, and I, for the life of me, do not know where this
[Guest]: comes from.
[Guest]: There's no lack of children.
[Guest]: We have, as I said, pantheons of gods who never actually have their own biological children.
[Guest]: I don't know where this pressure comes from, but it nonetheless exists and exists hugely.
[Guest]: So women are not free any longer, even now, despite contraception and the advances in
[Guest]: contraception to say, okay, I'm not going to have a child, because it's fairly impossible
[Guest]: to escape that trajectory once you're on it.
[Guest]: Then you can say, okay, if you have to have a child, have just one child.
[Guest]: And then all these narratives, oh, one child will suffer, and only child will suffer.
[Guest]: You need a second child to come along.
[Amit Varma]: It's, you know, one of my-
[Guest]: And oh, both childs are girls, you need a boy.
[Guest]: You need a boy.
[Guest]: So one of my theories is, and it's, I think, a true one, is that the more difficult an
[Guest]: action is, the more we sentimentalize it, right?
[Guest]: So we sentimentalize, for instance, war.
[Guest]: And similarly, I think we sentimentalize motherhood.
[Guest]: So for instance, if you just, again, do that blind test, right?
[Guest]: Ask somebody, any random person, how would you like your body taken over for nine months
[Guest]: by an alien being, being extremely sick through all of those nine months, not have any control
[Guest]: over your body, have your body torn open and blood and guts spilling out in order to give
[Guest]: birth to this alien being?
[Guest]: You think anybody will say yes?
[Guest]: If they said, we'll say, my God, you're mad.
[Guest]: How can you want to inflict that kind of violence on yourself, right?
[Guest]: Because it is such a violent act, it is smothered over by layers and layers and layers of sentimentality,
[Guest]: motherhood is the best thing that can happen to you.
[Guest]: You haven't lived, if you haven't experienced the joys of motherhood, there is no phrase
[Guest]: like the sorrows of motherhood, right?
[Guest]: It's always the joys of motherhood.
[Guest]: And ask any mother.
[Guest]: And if they're being honest, they'll say to you, my God, this is a pain.
[Guest]: I can't believe I signed up for this.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And it's a pain for the rest of your life.
[Guest]: Do you ever stop worrying about the child?
[Guest]: Do you ever stop fearing bodily damage or mental damage to them?
[Guest]: So no one in their right minds would sign up for this experience, if it were not utterly
[Guest]: sentimentalized to within an inch of your life.
[Amit Varma]: So I once wrote a column which will be linked from the show notes for your perusal, for
[Amit Varma]: which I got trolled more than anything else I have ever written.
[Amit Varma]: And the column basically argued that it's immoral to have children.
[Guest]: Good for you.
[Guest]: I must read that.
[Guest]: Not for obvious reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And, and parent trolls, I realized are worse than Bhak trolls or Shah Rukh Khan trolls,
[Unknown]: all the different kinds of trolls that I have encountered in my life.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: A deeper thought here is that I wasn't saying that birth control is a kind of panacea, obviously
[Amit Varma]: social change happens at a seemingly glacial pace.
[Amit Varma]: So if you look back on the last four or five decades, like my God, how much we have progressed.
[Amit Varma]: But I would also say that one of the fundamental, that the fundamental battle of humanity is
[Amit Varma]: as rational beings, we fight the way we are hardwired, right, for example, my wife and
[Amit Varma]: I have decided not to have kids, however, we are hardwired to create kids, we are fighting
[Amit Varma]: a hard wiring, I might feel all kinds of impulses in the course of a day, which I fight, I am
[Amit Varma]: fighting my biology.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and you could see that a lot of for example, the social pressures to have
[Amit Varma]: children or whatever, are a codification of the way we are hardwired, but equally culture,
[Amit Varma]: just as it can enforce our hardwiring can also militate against it.
[Amit Varma]: And that's sort of the whole kind of battle and all these desires are clearly natural
[Amit Varma]: to us.
[Guest]: And yet we fight them, you know, which is why the phrase hardwiring I'm not it's not
[Guest]: my best friend.
[Guest]: Because I actually I don't think there's that much that's hardwired.
[Guest]: I mean, clearly, there are some things that are but these things, the sort of things that
[Guest]: we associate with sentiment and emotion and things like that, are not hardwired and just
[Guest]: to stick with the example of children and childbearing.
[Guest]: If you look back even, let's say, 200 years, people routinely had x number of children,
[Guest]: half of whom would routinely die.
[Guest]: And this idea of Oh, my God, the loss of a child is the worst thing ever in the world
[Guest]: simply does not exist as a narrative.
[Guest]: Which is to say the relation of a parent to a child, as we understand it today, i.e. the
[Guest]: craving and all that is a fairly recent phenomenon, cultural phenomenon, which is what I mean
[Guest]: about the sentimentalizing thing, right?
[Guest]: If you're saying 1000s of years ago, people had children, because to go back to Ayyappan's
[Guest]: dilemma, we're going to die and we want someone to take over our cave.
[Guest]: That's different.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: If people said today, we are only producing children because we want to hang on to our
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: I'd actually have a lot of more sympathy for that kind of narrative.
[Amit Varma]: But I think both are a cultural rationalization of a natural hardwired instinct.
[Guest]: But I don't know if it's hardwired, if it requires cultural rationalization, you see,
[Guest]: that's my, that's my thing that that if it is hardwired, then it doesn't need anything.
[Guest]: If it needs something, that means it's actually more tenuous than
[Amit Varma]: No, I think it always needs a little bit of dressing to seem sort of, you know, respectable
[Amit Varma]: and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Anyways, so that's a whole different argument.
[Unknown]: We could do an episode on that as well sometime.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to what I think is a very important aspect of your book, and you have a chapter
[Amit Varma]: on this as well, which is about the role that language plays.
[Amit Varma]: And the fascinating fact that there are some languages, like most of our Indian languages,
[Amit Varma]: which are gendered languages.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, a chair is a particular gender and all and some which are not like Persian
[Amit Varma]: and English, you know, tell me a little bit about how languages play a part in the landscape
[Guest]: of desire.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: You know, the reason, side note, why you as with Bengali blood in your family, and why
[Guest]: me as South Indian blood in my family, the reason Hindi speakers often laugh at us is
[Amit Varma]: because we get our genders wrong.
[Guest]: Because both Bengali and Malayalam are not as gendered languages as Hindi, right?
[Guest]: Some nouns have gender, but not all of them.
[Guest]: So in fact, we don't have that usage of gender in our language.
[Amit Varma]: I am always mocked for this.
[Guest]: Those who are listening kindly don't mock me anymore.
[Guest]: I am too.
[Guest]: And I am a Dilliwali born and bred.
[Guest]: But you know, talk about hard wiring, there's something in me, where my Hindi in terms of
[Guest]: gender is completely subservient to my scant knowledge of Malayalam, where the gender doesn't
[Guest]: play out that way.
[Guest]: Anyway, there are only two things in the world that have gender, physical human and animal
[Guest]: beings and languages, that's it, which I find fascinating, because gender is what confers
[Guest]: identity on human beings and animals.
[Guest]: But for now, we'll talk about human beings.
[Guest]: And it's also what confers identity in language.
[Guest]: So for instance, in gendered languages, like Hindi, like Urdu, like all the Romance languages
[Guest]: in the world, all nouns will have a gender attached to it, right?
[Guest]: And they are awful, like cities, all objects will be feminine, cars, for instance, or cities
[Guest]: and things like that.
[Guest]: Whereas English in that sense is an extremely gender free language, because other than he
[Guest]: and she, nothing else has gender, no nouns have gender table, everything is an it.
[Guest]: So if we want to correlate language and gender identity, it seems like people who speak English
[Guest]: should be less gendered.
[Guest]: And people who speak Hindi should be more gendered, which is not the case.
[Guest]: But what I find fascinating is that languages can play a really interesting role in how
[Guest]: we think about desire.
[Guest]: So for instance, and this is going to go back actually to Tony Joseph, who you brought up
[Guest]: earlier in this idea of migration, people sort of think of Sanskrit as the Ur language
[Guest]: of India, right?
[Guest]: The language of the Indian soil, which was nothing of the kind, because Sanskrit actually
[Guest]: comes from the old Indo-Persian family of languages, and actually shares more in common
[Guest]: with Persian than it does with many other languages.
[Guest]: So for instance, the word ast, which in Sanskrit means I am, it's the fundamental assertion,
[Guest]: is the same word in Persian, ast, right?
[Guest]: And so Persian, though, is a non-gendered language.
[Guest]: And Sanskrit is a gendered language.
[Guest]: But one of the arguments I'm making is that the reason why the Kama Sutra, Buddhist texts,
[Guest]: Jain texts, Vedic texts, all these texts written in Sanskrit, sometimes in Pali, but sometimes
[Guest]: in Sanskrit, a lot of them are able to talk about genders as being more than just two.
[Guest]: There is also the Napunsak, which is the third, there is the male Napunsak, and there is the
[Guest]: female Napunsak.
[Guest]: There are like five or six categories of gender.
[Guest]: And one of the arguments I'm making is that the reason why, say, these texts written in
[Guest]: Sanskrit are able to have multiple genders is because they still have a trace memory
[Guest]: of where they come from, which is Central Asia, which is the Persian family of languages.
[Guest]: And so for me, it's really fascinating which languages will and will not allow that capaciousness.
[Guest]: English, for instance, does not allow that capaciousness historically.
[Guest]: They're so horrified by anything that does not fit two genders, they say, we have to
[Guest]: shut it down.
[Guest]: But linguistically, they're great.
[Guest]: They don't feminize objects and they don't masculinize valor and things like that.
[Guest]: So there isn't a direct correlation, but there very much is a relationship between, to go
[Guest]: back to what you were saying about our desire to categorize.
[Guest]: Language is our means of categorizing.
[Guest]: And when we categorize the world around us according to gender, the world looks different
[Guest]: from when we don't categorize the world according to gender.
[Amit Varma]: So I've always sort of speculated on the role that language plays in shaping a society.
[Amit Varma]: For example, it strikes me that one of the reasons that I like Japanese literature so
[Amit Varma]: much, for example, is that my aesthetic preference is to minimalism.
[Amit Varma]: So all the writers that I read, whether they are Kawabata, Murakami, Yoko Ogawa, or whoever,
[Amit Varma]: are all minimal, very clean writers.
[Amit Varma]: And that completely plays to me.
[Amit Varma]: And English has some of those values and others.
[Amit Varma]: And when you look at Urdu poetry, for example, it is just the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: It's very sensuous and florid and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And if you translate a poem that appears beautiful in Urdu to English, it will fail on that test
[Amit Varma]: of values alone, because you'll, you know, you'll value precision and all of that much
[Unknown]: more in English.
[Amit Varma]: So in the context of desire, how much does the nature of these languages, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: being gendered and not being gendered and all of that, affect the people?
[Amit Varma]: Is there some kind of link that you've been able to?
[Guest]: You know, again, this is fascinating, because Urdu poetry, which you brought up, and Urdu
[Guest]: is a gendered language, which Persian is not.
[Guest]: But Urdu poetry is, as you said, florid, full of curlicues and flourishes, and just absolutely
[Guest]: stunning.
[Guest]: But it can also be extremely precise, right?
[Guest]: One of my favorite shares from Mir, which I can only tell you in the English translation,
[Guest]: Mir says, if not him, there is his brother.
[Guest]: Mir, are there any restrictions in love?
[Guest]: I mean, wow, can't even think about it, very precise.
[Guest]: But also extremely elusive.
[Amit Varma]: There's another line quoted in your book, which I wrote down here, which is translated
[Amit Varma]: by Ruth Vanita in Sex and the City from the poet Kass, where he says, quote, just nipples
[Amit Varma]: meeting is not satisfying.
[Amit Varma]: Some dildo action now would be good, stop quote, which is quite precise, yeah, can't
[Guest]: argue with that.
[Amit Varma]: Which is very precise.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Guest]: So then you have to think, and this is true of Shakespeare too, that the point that is
[Guest]: being conveyed can be very precise.
[Guest]: But the form of that conveyance is what gives rise to desire, to sensuality, you know, which
[Guest]: is why we can say the Japanese might alas, and I love Japanese literature as much as
[Guest]: you do.
[Guest]: I love Japanese aesthetic.
[Guest]: But why the Japanese might alas be much more repressed than even we are, right?
[Amit Varma]: Both in terms of gender and in terms of sexuality.
[Amit Varma]: Because they don't have the language.
[Guest]: Because they are perhaps paying homage to an aesthetic of repression, an aesthetic of
[Guest]: so repression is then seen as a way of life, rather than as something that's imposed on
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: Whereas we can still see repression as something that's imposed on us, because our cultural
[Guest]: coordinates are all excessive, right?
[Guest]: This is why the British when they came here said, Oh, my God, where have we come, right?
[Guest]: You have here, Nawabs dressing as women, Krishna having sex with 16,000 gopis, what the hell
[Guest]: is going on?
[Guest]: The beauty of the subcontinent is that we have been a subcontinent of excess.
[Guest]: And that excess also comes up just Amit, as you know, in the sheer number of languages.
[Guest]: So even though many of these languages are gendered, the sheer volume and number of languages,
[Guest]: dialects, versions, I said to you two weeks ago, I was in Trivandrum for the Lit Fest.
[Guest]: And my family comes from Malabar, North Kerala.
[Guest]: The difference between Malabari Malayalam and Travancore Malayalam is huge, right?
[Guest]: So that kind of linguistic variety, I think does conduce to variety in different spheres
[Guest]: of life as well and other spheres of life, including especially desire.
[Amit Varma]: That's incredibly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, now sort of get to a question which struck me as I was reading the book that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've got a bit in your book, for example, about how Plato's Symposium, which
[Amit Varma]: was written in 385 BC, is a paean in praise of pedagogical sodomy, right?
[Amit Varma]: And there is this tradition, which also then comes down to even the Sufis and even, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you talk about maybe Ramakrishna Paramhansa and Vivekananda being an example of that,
[Amit Varma]: where there is that element of desire playing out between teacher and student.
[Amit Varma]: In many cases, a student might be underage.
[Amit Varma]: In another chapter on hair, you point out about how, you know, young men lose their
[Amit Varma]: attractiveness as soon as hair begins to sprout and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Looking at that with the lens of morality as we do today, and the importance we correctly
[Amit Varma]: finally give to consent, you know, how does that affect your looking at desire?
[Amit Varma]: Because these notions of consent and individual rights and all of that are in a sense, you
[Amit Varma]: know, relatively recent, I won't say inventions, but they've been given importance relatively
[Guest]: in recent centuries.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one, you know, you have this beautiful multiplicity of desires, there's so much happening,
[Guest]: but there are also these questions.
[Guest]: Yeah, so tricky, you know, I mean, so complex and complicated.
[Guest]: What we call underage today, as you know, was not always underage.
[Guest]: We all have great, great, great grandmothers and grandfathers who were married when they
[Guest]: were nine or 10, which will strike people with horror now, but frankly, that is where
[Guest]: we all came from.
[Guest]: One of the things that I don't like about us saying, oh, in that time period or in that
[Guest]: day and age, because that implies a position, a vantage point of superiority now, which
[Guest]: I don't think is fully earned.
[Guest]: So this entire thing about age is one of these things that I think is a bit, and should be
[Guest]: at least treated as a bit more fluid and complicated than it is right now, because we all have
[Guest]: had ancestors who were quote unquote underage.
[Guest]: So that is one thing, right?
[Guest]: The idea that somehow when you're 18, everything becomes okay is a fairly arbitrary sign.
[Guest]: In fact, Alfred Kinsey, who you know, is a famous, famous American sexologist, has compelling
[Guest]: sections where he says, by saying that you are only an adult when you're 18 years old,
[Guest]: is to completely ignore the most turbulent sexual years of the teenage, when you're told
[Guest]: that it's not only illegal, but immoral to be sexually active.
[Guest]: And he says the kinds of neurotic disorders that produces is actually harming society
[Guest]: much more than we know it, right?
[Guest]: So to suddenly say, at 18, you are and can be sexually active, I think is actually a
[Guest]: slightly pernicious thing to say.
[Guest]: Because long before 18, we are actually sexually active in our minds, if nowhere else, right?
[Guest]: And to be told over and over again, that's wrong, really doesn't number on people, right?
[Guest]: As we know, in our country as well, really sort of to be told that's bad, that's wrong
[Guest]: is really problematic.
[Guest]: The question of consent is just so much more complex.
[Guest]: I think there is no doubt, the two things I want to say about it, the first is, there
[Guest]: is no doubt that in an ideal world, we should all be able to experience, express and recognize
[Guest]: consent.
[Guest]: The reason why it is so difficult is because consent is not a transparent thing, right?
[Guest]: If it was, then it wouldn't be a big deal.
[Guest]: We wouldn't have all these things about consent is necessary and all that if it was that transparent.
[Guest]: The reason it's not transparent to others is because it's not always transparent to
[Guest]: ourselves.
[Guest]: So do I want something now that five minutes later, I won't want?
[Guest]: Do I not want something now that five minutes later, I might?
[Guest]: Do I want something now that two days later will fill me with so much shame that I will
[Guest]: retrospectively say I did not want it then, right?
[Guest]: Where is the consent in all this?
[Guest]: What is my consent in all this?
[Guest]: And I think those are questions that necessarily complicate what we understand as consent.
[Guest]: The problem with those complications, of course, is that people can use it as loopholes for
[Guest]: very real violence.
[Guest]: And this brings me to my second point, which is so far, and I don't know how long we've
[Guest]: been talking, an hour and a half, two hours.
[Guest]: So far, we've been talking about desires and about sexualities and the plurality of desires
[Guest]: in unadulteratedly happy terms and good terms.
[Guest]: It's a good thing, but desire more than anything else in the world has an underbelly, which
[Guest]: is not that great, which is in fact violent, which can be sadistic, which can be really
[Guest]: intent on wreaking damage in the world.
[Guest]: Freud's big insight is that our desires are always both things.
[Guest]: They're always something that we want to give us joy, but it also is something that gives
[Guest]: us destructiveness.
[Guest]: And so when we think about desire, unfortunately, we have to be aware that desire can be extremely
[Guest]: violent.
[Guest]: That's the danger of desire, right?
[Guest]: It can be violent in a way that we like because it can question the status quo.
[Guest]: That's how we've been talking about it.
[Guest]: And that kind of violence is something to be encouraged.
[Guest]: It can be violent because it can throw acid in the face of a woman who has said no to
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: That's the kind of violence we don't want.
[Guest]: How do we separate the one from the other?
[Guest]: Because it's often one that turns into the other.
[Guest]: All these people, many of these narratives of acid attacks, for instance, the man would
[Guest]: say I loved her.
[Guest]: That can strike us and should as being utterly warped.
[Guest]: But the dirty secret of desire is that all desire is potentially warped that way.
[Guest]: And this is something that is the complicating factor.
[Guest]: This is what we need to also think about when we think about the multitudes of desire.
[Guest]: Because this too is one among those multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that we are constantly involved in trying to figure out a trade off between
[Unknown]: two things.
[Amit Varma]: One is celebrating our natural desires as the Kama Sutra does.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is repressing our desires as say yoga seeks to do.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the second is very important as well, for the simple reason that it's again,
[Amit Varma]: me as a rational machine, fighting my programming, that, you know, I might feel that my desires
[Amit Varma]: get in the way of doing things that I feel I should be doing rationally.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I try to bring an end to it, I try to discipline my mind.
[Amit Varma]: This is why mindfulness meditation is such a big deal these days.
[Amit Varma]: You know, this was one of the core reasonings for why kind of yoga came up, it's kind of
[Amit Varma]: both things.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And no, I mean, I was, I agree completely.
[Guest]: This is why, you know, I mean, philosophers and thinkers for centuries have known this,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Which is why someone like Hobbes is able to say that life in nature is nasty, brutish
[Guest]: and short, because actually left to our own devices, we'll all just kill each other, right?
[Guest]: Because that is actually our instinct.
[Guest]: Freud is very, very clear about this.
[Guest]: He says the only when he writes this famous book, Civilization and its Discontents, he
[Guest]: says the only way we can be civilized is if we repress our desires.
[Guest]: And so repression for him is actually what results in civilization.
[Guest]: You cannot have civilization without repression.
[Guest]: And so that's absolutely right.
[Guest]: We have to repress our desires.
[Guest]: But with the knowledge that we're doing that, because our desires can go in directions that
[Guest]: we have no control over, which is what makes desire fascinating, right, for me and for
[Guest]: us.
[Guest]: Yes, to repression, but repression is not necessarily the same, although it has been
[Guest]: allied with immorality, illegality, all that stuff.
[Guest]: We all walk that fine line between expression and repression.
[Guest]: That line is different for everybody individually.
[Guest]: There is no perfect golden mean for what that line is.
[Guest]: Absolutely the sort of yoga karma relation is very much that attempt at finding that
[Guest]: balance failing most of the time.
[Guest]: But yes, repression has a role to play and a huge role to play in ensuring that we can
[Guest]: live without killing each other, right?
[Guest]: Which is why when people go around just murdering each other, you call it anarchy, as in there's
[Guest]: no rule whatsoever.
[Guest]: Similarly, people go around having sex with whoever they want.
[Guest]: That would also count as anarchy, because you are sidestepping the civilizational impulse.
[Amit Varma]: I've already taken more than two hours of your time.
[Guest]: Oh really?
[Amit Varma]: Which is this is the beauty of the conversations that I'm fortunate enough to have on the show
[Amit Varma]: that it's just so much fun.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we go, I also want to ask you, what has happened in the last five
[Amit Varma]: or 10 years, is that now we can get far deeper insights into human nature because of technology.
[Amit Varma]: For example, a year and a half back, I reviewed this book called Everybody Lies by Seth Stevens
[Amit Varma]: Davidowitz.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard of it?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: What Seth Stevens Davidowitz basically does is he looks at anonymized search results from
[Amit Varma]: Google and other social media, but a vast amount of data, literally big data, and then
[Amit Varma]: tries to figure out because when you're searching for something on your laptop, it's a private
[Amit Varma]: act.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to post it to others.
[Amit Varma]: It's what you really want.
[Amit Varma]: It reveals something about you.
[Amit Varma]: And I found the book incredibly fascinating in the kind of insights it threw up for many
[Amit Varma]: of which I had absolutely remotely, no explanation.
[Amit Varma]: For example, yeah, I mean, one that would not surprise you is that Americans search
[Amit Varma]: for porn more than the search for weather, which is of course, you can't, you can't jerk
[Unknown]: off to cumulus clouds.
[Amit Varma]: That's obviously there.
[Amit Varma]: But what I found interesting was that incest is a surprisingly popular category, and 25%
[Amit Varma]: of searches on Pornhub, which is a popular porn site, 25% of searches on Pornhub by women
[Amit Varma]: feature violence against women.
[Amit Varma]: And these are searches by women, you know, with common phrases being painful, anal crying,
[Amit Varma]: public disgrace, extreme brutal gangbang, I think these are popular tags.
[Amit Varma]: And 5% even look for non consensual sex, which is rape or forced sex.
[Amit Varma]: And what is interesting is that search rates for all these terms are at least twice as
[Amit Varma]: common among women than men, yeah, which I found very counterintuitive, and I couldn't
[Guest]: sort of explain it to myself, it's, it's, it's, it's fascinating.
[Guest]: We have known for actually quite a while, that women can often fantasize about being
[Guest]: raped.
[Guest]: And women can often fantasize about violent non consensual sex.
[Guest]: Now, some of us might argue that that is fantasy, and that if it were to happen in reality,
[Guest]: it would not in fact be what we want.
[Guest]: And that could well be true.
[Guest]: And just in what I've said the last two sentences, you see how consent is so compromised, right?
[Guest]: It's so split between our fantasy and our reality.
[Guest]: And sex or our desire always straddles fantasy and reality.
[Guest]: And so that's one of the reasons why I said the idea of consent is not at all a transparent
[Guest]: one, because we actually want different things.
[Guest]: We don't want to be raped.
[Guest]: But we have been brought up in a culture in which violence against women has been so naturalized
[Guest]: as to be sexualized as well.
[Guest]: And we live in that culture, right?
[Guest]: We don't live in Mars.
[Guest]: And so for instance, how is it possible that all these old men, 75, 85, oligarchs, rich
[Guest]: men, all have young 25 something wives, or girlfriends or lovers or whatever it is.
[Guest]: It's not because the women are finding them that sexually attractive, but sexual attractiveness
[Guest]: also has being involved with men, rich men in power as one of its tags.
[Guest]: And so in that case, then sexual desire to go back to our earlier conversation has barely
[Guest]: anything to do with genitalia, and everything to do with this guy is a rich patriarch.
[Guest]: And so for instance, why would Monica Lewinsky have an affair with Bill Clinton?
[Guest]: Because he's the President of the United States of America.
[Amit Varma]: But I'd argue that that is the proximate reason, but not the ultimate one, in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: what, you know, evolutionary psychologists would say is that women have been hardwired
[Amit Varma]: to be attracted to successful men, and, you know, older men who can look after them and
[Amit Varma]: their babies well.
[Amit Varma]: And so that attraction will result in say, a Monica Lewinsky going for a Bill Clinton.
[Guest]: And it's kind of hardwired in that sense.
[Guest]: See, this is why I don't like hardwired at all, right?
[Guest]: Which is why evolutionary psychology, I think, can be fascinating.
[Guest]: But I don't like this phrase of it, because it's not like if you're thinking about hardwired
[Guest]: as you know, something that comes down over centuries.
[Guest]: It's not like 50,000 years ago, a neanderthal woman was saying, let me find someone who
[Guest]: was 90 years old to look after me and my children.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's simply not the case.
[Amit Varma]: You'd be drawn to success, you'd be drawn to the alpha male in the tribe, which would,
[Amit Varma]: of course, increase your chances of reproductive success.
[Guest]: But you could also be drawn in the opposite way, which we don't say at all, right?
[Guest]: You could be drawn to the woman who has multiple children, because you think she'll have more
[Guest]: children.
[Guest]: That's not the case that happens here.
[Guest]: At all.
[Guest]: Men are not attracted to women who have multiple children, necessarily, right?
[Amit Varma]: Men are attracted to multiple women for just that reason.
[Guest]: Men are more promiscuous naturally than women.
[Guest]: See, naturally ka nahi pata.
[Guest]: Not at all.
[Guest]: You see, I think we're naturalizing something, and then saying it is natural.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's sort of, you know, in the whole nature versus nature thing, I think it's sort
[Amit Varma]: of dangerous to go to one extreme or the other.
[Amit Varma]: I like the phrasing that I'd once heard, that nature gives us knobs, nurture turns them.
[Amit Varma]: So I think both are incredibly important, and we should not deny one or the other.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: No, no, there's no question of denying.
[Guest]: But I sort of don't think that 25-year-olds being attracted to 90-year-olds is somehow
[Guest]: hardwired, because there are plenty of, let's say, 24-year-olds who are perfectly rich men,
[Guest]: for instance.
[Guest]: You know, and it also doesn't explain the fact that women are always younger, the men
[Guest]: always have to be older, you know, all that stuff is problematic.
[Guest]: And you know, talk about underage or whatever it is, these things are very complicated.
[Guest]: And yes, there is centuries of conditioning of one kind or the other.
[Guest]: That's the compromise we can arrive at, of conditioning of one kind or the other.
[Guest]: But all this conditioning means that in some ways, many ways, many of us might have naturalized
[Guest]: our own oppression, to the extent that it doesn't even feel oppressive to us any longer.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And this was a big insight, say, by someone like Michel Foucault, where he says, you know,
[Guest]: people keep saying, oh, we want relationships of equality, where there is no power differential
[Guest]: between the two.
[Guest]: And he says, you can't have a relationship without power difference, it is an impossibility.
[Guest]: And in fact, this is also an insight of the best kind of feminist thinking, is that power
[Guest]: difference is sexy, is attractive.
[Guest]: So to sort of say we want a relationship of equality is a pipe dream.
[Guest]: But again, as I say, there's always fantasy and reality involved in all these conversations
[Guest]: across the spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another interesting finding of everybody lies has nothing to do with nature.
[Amit Varma]: Because this particular finding was unique to India.
[Amit Varma]: And this finding was that so basically, what he did was, he typed my husband wants into
[Amit Varma]: the search bar to see what would pop up.
[Amit Varma]: And apparently, for Indians, the number one result was, my husband wants me to breastfeed
[Amit Varma]: him.
[Amit Varma]: And this is apparently 50 times more common in India than anywhere in the world.
[Amit Varma]: So it is clearly not nothing to do with hardwiring.
[Amit Varma]: It is clearly a cultural thing, that Indian men want to be breastfed.
[Amit Varma]: And this is just so bizarre that, you know, I couldn't fathom what the reasons was cultural
[Amit Varma]: for whatever, for something like this to even evolve to this stage.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: No, really, it doesn't make that phrase, ma ka ladla, even more evocative, doesn't it?
[Amit Varma]: It does.
[Guest]: This, the sense of, I mean, we've always known that about, about Indian men, or rather Indian,
[Guest]: Indians obsession with having male children, and therefore those male children being sort
[Guest]: of pedestalized in ways that I think are actually very dangerous, both for the child and the
[Amit Varma]: mother.
[Amit Varma]: And then also the saas bahu dynamics.
[Guest]: Exactly, exactly.
[Guest]: But I'd be interested, I mean, I haven't read the book, but does he say there's an equivalent
[Guest]: in, let's say, the Jewish community, because that's the other community that is supposed
[Amit Varma]: to have that mother-son thing.
[Amit Varma]: Not this specific things, but he did find that while there are things that are common
[Amit Varma]: across cultures, which plays to the whole hardwiring nature thing, but there are also
[Amit Varma]: many, many differences.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and this was one of the unique things about, I'll quote him, in fact, I have it
[Amit Varma]: right in front of me, quote, porn searches for depictions of women, breastfeeding men
[Amit Varma]: are four times higher in India and Bangladesh than in any other country in the world.
[Guest]: India and Bangladesh.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: That's fascinating.
[Guest]: It's really fascinating.
[Guest]: But you know, porn in, in East Asia, Southeast Asia, Korea, and all that is very scatological,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: In Japan, there are these bars where you lie under a glass table and have women shitting
[Guest]: on you.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard of that?
[Guest]: I'm not surprised, but I haven't heard of it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So men lie under glass tables and have women sitting on top of them, shitting on them,
[Amit Varma]: which is just, which is just fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: As a student of Desire, does porn interest you?
[Amit Varma]: Did you look at a lot of porn while, I mean, look at not in that sense, but did you sort
[Amit Varma]: of study?
[Guest]: Only, I mean, for this book, only for the chapter on bhabhis, because that's the other
[Guest]: finding in Pornhub is that Indians search for that word bhabhi.
[Guest]: One of the searches, one of the highly, highly, highly ranked searches is bhabhi.
[Guest]: And also that women are the, in India are the third biggest demographic who watch porn
[Guest]: on Pornhub, which is also fascinating given how repressed women are in India.
[Guest]: Porn, my answer is yes and no.
[Guest]: It fascinates me in as much as it is a popular exploration of sexual desires that might not
[Guest]: be sanctioned, right?
[Guest]: On the one hand, I find that fascinating.
[Guest]: On the other hand, those desires that aren't sanctioned actually are such a mirror image
[Guest]: of ones that are sanctioned that I'm not that interested in it actually.
[Guest]: So in other words, if I just study sort of the daylight world as opposed to the twilight
[Guest]: world, and I'm using this only metaphorically, the daylight world of desire, that is sort
[Guest]: of pornographic enough in its imagination as than porn is.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: So having taken, you know, more than two hours of your time, what are you working on next?
[Guest]: Yeah, good question.
[Amit Varma]: That's what Ravi, my editor keeps asking me, what are you writing next?
[Guest]: Well, God bless Ravi if he made you write this book, but what's next?
[Guest]: I really think I want to write something on laws.
[Guest]: There's this Pedro Almodovar film, I don't know whether you've seen it, called The Law
[Guest]: of Desire.
[Guest]: So I want that to be the title of my book, The Law of Desire.
[Guest]: And I just want to look at three or four different sexual activities and the laws governing them
[Guest]: and to think about what that says about us and our society.
[Guest]: So I want to think about marriage, I want to think about prostitution, I want to think
[Guest]: about adultery, I want to think about transgender, and of course, homosexuality.
[Guest]: And think about, I mean, these are just the five right now, rape might be one of them,
[Guest]: one might come out, one might go in.
[Guest]: But just to think about how we imagine these sexual crimes, and how we imagine the law
[Guest]: can actually put a lid on them.
[Guest]: Just to think about those.
[Amit Varma]: This is so fascinating, I'm filled with desire to read your next book.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Guest]: You are, I hope you get told this often, but you are an amazing interlocutor, and a pleasure
[Guest]: to talk to.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Guest]: You're so kind.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for that.
[Amit Varma]: In case you enjoyed listening to the show, kindly remember that the history of India
[Amit Varma]: could be called the Indian National Congress.
[Amit Varma]: And to find out more about it, go to your nearest online or offline bookstore and buy
[Amit Varma]: Infinite Variety.
[Amit Varma]: By which I don't mean buy a lot of books, which would also be welcome, but buy this
[Amit Varma]: specific book, Infinite Variety, A History of Desire in India by Madhavi Menon, very
[Amit Varma]: smartly.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason she has written so many books, she's not on social media.
[Amit Varma]: But if you want to follow me on Twitter, you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: They have some incredible public policy courses, check them out at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: And I hope you're inspired by this episode and you do something naughty tonight with
[Amit Varma]: full consent.